In a collective action problem , each of N individuals chooses to free ride ( f ) or contribute ( c ) to a collective action. An individual’s payoff depends on her own action and the total number of cooperators. Individuals receive a higher payoff from free riding, Payoff( f , C ) > Payoff( c , C +1), but the sum of payoffs is maximized when everyone contributes. 

A collective action problem can be represented as a many-player version of the Prisoners’ Dilemma. We can thus refer back to the solutions proposed in Chapter 22 to get insights into how to create and maintain cooperation. However, those approaches will be incomplete for two reasons: collective action problems involve groups and communities, not just pairs, and many collective action problems take particular forms that make solutions more effective than others. 

---

### Public Goods 

Our first specific type of collective action problem involves public good provision. Public goods satisfy _non-rivalry_ (one person’s use in no way interferes with any other person’s use) and _non-excludability_ (individuals cannot be prevented from use). Public goods include clean air, the national defense, early tornado warning signals, and the production of knowledge. The United States Constitution lists establishing justice, ensuring domestic tranquility, and providing for the common defense as responsibilities of the government. These too are public goods. Private goods—bicycles, oatmeal cookies, and protractors—are neither non-rival nor non-excludable. Knowledge is both. Juxtaposing an oatmeal cookie and knowledge of trigonometry highlights the difference. A teacher might say, “Carla ate the last oatmeal cookie, so no one else can have one.” She would never say, “Melissa, I am so sorry, but Carla just used the Pythagorean theorem, and now no one else can use it.” The non-excludability and non-rivalry of public goods produce a collective action problem not because people do not want to contribute. They do. The problem arises because people undervalue their contributions. For every dollar a person contributes, she adds to everyone’s utility. In the formal model we describe here, each person allocates her income between a public good and a representative private good. Think of the private good as money that can be spent on anything else. Extending the model to include multiple public and private goods would only complicate the analysis. 

---