Multi-Armed Bandit Model To demonstrate their efficacy, opioids were tested against placebos. In clinical trials, patients were randomly assigned to take either opioids or a placebo. The assignment of the opioid can be modeled as one arm of a two-armed bandit and the placebo as the other arm. At the end of treatment, each trial is classified as a success or a failure. Clinical tests found that patients who received opioids experienced (statistically) significantly less pain. Tests on patients who had hip replacements, dental surgery, and cancer treatments all found that opioids outperform placebos. 

With any drug, the potential for addiction is a concern. Tests showed that a small percentage of patients, fewer than 1%, became addicted, allowing the drug to be approved. those tests did not take into account the possibility that doctors would write longer prescriptions, in some cases a month’s supply. The longer an individual takes opioids, the more likely that person becomes addicted. Empirical addiction rates exceeded 2.5% for patients with longer prescriptions. The Markov model shown in the box below shows how an increase in those rates from 1% to 2.5% can increase the equilibrium number of addicts 5-fold. The model’s transition probabilities are only loosely calibrated to data. We are using the model to build intuition for how a relatively small rate of addiction can lead to a large number of addicts. By experimenting with the model, we find that if we lower the probability of leaving the addict state and increase the probability of moving from the no-pain state to the opioid state, then the proportion of addicts can increase dramatically. If, for example, we lower the transition from addict to no pain to 1% in the second model, the proportion of addicts increases to 35%. One implication of this type 

---

of model thinking has been that some health care providers, such as Blue Cross, now limit the number of pills a doctor can prescribe. In addition, some states, including the State of Michigan, have passed laws restricting the number of pills in a single prescription. 

---