The riot model and the ping-pong model can provide insights into stock market crashes and price rebounds. We consider two illustrative cases here. The first occurred on Monday, October 19, 1987, when the Dow Jones Industrial Average fell by over 22%. The next day, this collapse reverberated around the globe. The cause of the crash remains a topic of analysis. At the time, the United States economy was in its fourth year of expansion. In the first eight months of the year, the Dow Jones Industrial Average had risen over 40%. Despite or perhaps because of this run-up in values, many people believed stock prices were overvalued. On the Sunday prior to the crash, the United States secretary of the treasury, James Baker, threatened to weaken the dollar if Germany did not lower tariffs, a comment that at the time did not seem of great import. The next day, the market crashed. Fourteen months later, the market returned to its previous value. To apply the models, we assume a single financial asset representing the entire market. We assume that each person holding this asset has a _crash threshold_. If the price of the asset falls more than the crash threshold in a given day, the investor sells the asset, taking her money out of the market. This rule captures the behavior of trend or _noise traders_ and creates a version of the riot model. If some percentage of investors woke up on October 19 and decided to sell a substantial amount of assets, they would have caused a drop in the market. If that drop exceeded other investors’ crash thresholds, those others would sell assets as well, causing a downward spiral. The result is a classic positive feedback loop. Selling begets lower prices, which causes more selling. We now add insights from the ping-pong model to the analysis. If prices falls too low, some people will apply a second rule, a _bargain threshold rule_. According to this rule, a person 

---

buys if the price falls below this value. Here, our investor acts based on value, not trends. When prices fall dramatically, the bargain thresholds create a negative feedback. Buyers rush in to buy at a bargain price, halting the price fall. Actual markets are more complex than this simple account of sellers with thresholds and buyers waiting in the wings. The stock market contains many types of traders, including large institutions, pension funds, foreign governments, speculators, 

portfolio insurers, and speculators, as well as small investors.^5 As a result of this diversity, someone is almost always willing to buy as prices fall, producing the negative feedback necessary to stabilize the market. Early analyses of the crash emphasized the prevalence of _(computer) program trading_. These are threshold-based rules encoded in computer programs. Rules such as _sell all stocks if the market index falls below some set price_ were carried out automatically, with no human supervision. Most analysts now believe that program trading contributed to the 1987 crash but was not the primary cause. More detailed analyses of the 1987 crash reveal that a large number of portfolio insurers—traders who guarantee a rate of return to the portfolios of their investors —produced strong positive feedbacks that were not tempered by negative feedbacks. As the market fell, these portfolio insurers sold off stock to prevent losses. As the crash unfolded, these insurers sold more and more stock. In effect, insurers acted as if they were populations of individuals with diverse thresholds. One portfolio insurer sold over $1 billion in stock. To put that in perspective, only $20 billion in stock was sold that entire day. The second crash, the May 6, 2010, “flash crash” dropped the Dow Jones Industrial Average by 5% in three minutes. It was the result of algorithmic trades. Owing to the complexity and speed of modern financial markets, no one knows for certain what exactly caused the flash crash. We know that a large mutual fund made a huge sell order, dumping over $4 

---

billion of stock futures into a market containing high-speed trading algorithms that try to exploit beneficial trades. The algorithms sensed a price trend and starting executing trades at breakneck speed. Imagine the riot model at high speed. This produced a toxic market, in which traders worry that large institutional investors know something that they do not know 

and so they exit the market.^6 Many of the algorithms stopped trading given the abnormal market behavior; other algorithms kept selling, and a crash ensued, all in the span of a couple of minutes. Within twenty minutes, the bargain rules went into effect and, as predicted by the ping-pong model, brought prices back up (nearly) to the original price. 

---