A collection of alternatives { A , B , C , D ,..., N } have associated reward distributions { f ( A ), f ( B ), f ( C ), f ( D ),..., f ( N )}. The decision-maker has prior beliefs over each distribution. In each period, the decision-maker chooses an alternative, receives a reward, and calculates new beliefs based on the reward. 

Determining the optimal action relies on a four-step process. First, we calculate the expected immediate reward from each alternative. Second, for each alternative, we update our beliefs about the reward distribution. Third, based on our new beliefs about reward distributions, we determine the best possible actions in all subsequent periods based on what we know. Last, we add the expected reward from the action in the next period to the expected rewards from the optimal future actions. That sum is known as the _Gittins index_. In each period, the optimal action has the largest Gittins index. Notice that the calculation of the index quantifies the value of exploration. If we try an alternative, the Gittins index does _not_ equal the expected reward. It equals the sum of all future rewards assuming we take optimal actions given what we have learned. Computing a Gittins index is difficult. For a (relatively) simple example, suppose there exists a safe alternative that is certain to pay $500 and a risky alternative that with a 10% probability will always pay $1,000. The remaining 90% of the time, the risky alternative pays nothing. To calculate the Gittins index for the risky alternative, we first ask what could happen: either it always pays $1,000 or it always pays nothing. We then think through how each outcome would influence our beliefs. If we knew the risky alternative paid $1,000, we would always choose it. If we knew that the risky arm paid nothing, we 

---

would always choose the safe arm in the future. It follows that the Gittins index for the risky arm corresponds to a 10% probability of a reward of $1,000 in each period and a 90% probability of a reward of $500 in every period but the first. For a situation in which we get to choose an alternative many times, this averages out to approximately $550 per period. The risky alternative 

is therefore the better choice.^4 

---