Spatial Voting Model CEO pay is determined by a vote of a compensation committee. In the United States, compensation committees include many current and former CEOs, who prefer higher pay, as well as compensation experts ( X ). Other countries include workers ( W ) on compensation committees, resulting in a median voter who prefers much lower pay. 

 Cause of inequality: CEOs determine their own pay through capture. Increases in the pay of any one CEO shifts preferences toward higher pay for all CEOs. 

The model explains the rise in CEO pay based on the preferences of board members about what appropriate CEO pay should be. Here we can refer back to multiple models of value. It could be that the preferences of compensation committee members rely on model based thinking informed by data. However, those preferences might also be socially constructed or part of an elaborate log roll, in which CEOs vote to raise one another’s pay. Our next model of income inequality comes from Thomas Piketty’s best-selling book _Capital in the Twenty-First Century_. This is less a model than an observation that the rate of return on capital exceeds the growth rate of capital. When that holds, the portion of income that high-income individuals receive from returns on capital will increase over time. By constructing more elaborate versions of the growth models from Chapter 8, it can be shown that the return to 

---

capital should always exceed the rate of growth in the broader economy. Over the long haul, an economy might grow at less than 2% or 3%, but returns to capital may be more than double that. It follows that in an economy that consists of workers who earn wages and capitalists who earn income from rents, the share of income going to capitalists will increase. To be a bit more formal, the rate at which capital increases will depend on three rates: the consumption rate, the tax rate, and the return on capital. Consumption depends on the level of capital. A person with little capital will consume a large percentage of her income. A person who owns a substantial amount of capital will consume a small percentage of her income. As shown formally in the box below, if we make the consumption level constant, the consumption rate will equal that amount divided by the level of capital. Thus, wealthier people will consume at a lower rate making it more likely that their net capital increases. 

---