If the neighbors of an open node include a cooperator of degree _D_ with _K_ cooperating neighbors and all non-cooperators of the empty node have no cooperating neighbors, then the open node becomes a cooperator if and only if the ratio of cooperative advantage exceeds the ratio of the degree to the 

number of cooperators:^13 

---

### Group Selection 

Our final mechanism for bootstrapping, evolving, and maintaining cooperation, _group selection_ , relies on competition or selection among groups.^14 To model group selection, we divide the population into subgroups. Within each subgroup, individuals engage in a version of the cooperative action model where each individual either cooperates or defects. As before, we can assign a performance to each individual. We also assign a performance to each group equal to the average performance of its members. The model assumes selection among groups in which copies of the highest-performing groups will replace lower-performing groups. This advantages groups of cooperators, which will perform better. The intuition that cooperative groups should take over given group selection has a catch: within any group, the defectors outperform the cooperators. Consider two groups of size ten. The first group contains two cooperators and eight defectors. The second group contains two defectors and eight cooperators. Assume benefits equal 2 and costs equal 1, as above. In the first group, each defector’s performance equals 4, as it receives a benefit of 2 from each cooperator. Each cooperator incurs a cost of 9 and receives a benefit of only 2, so its performance equals -7. The average performance of a group member equals 1.8. In the second group, each defector receives 2 from each of eight cooperators, so its performance equals 16. Each cooperator’s performance equals 5: it receives 14 from the other seven cooperators but pays out 9 in costs. The average performance in the second group equals 7.2. These calculations reveal a paradoxical insight: within each group, defectors perform better than cooperators, yet the higherperforming group contains more cooperators. A tension should be apparent: _individual selection favors defection but group selection favors cooperation_. This tension operates across a variety of ecological, social, political, and economic contexts. Trees whose roots cooperate with other trees fare worse individually, but they 

---

contribute to stronger ecosystems better able to spread into open spaces. Cooperative individuals within communities may reap fewer benefits than defectors, but cooperative communities will grow in size. Politicians who support their party may be less likely to be reelected than those who focus on themselves, but cohesive parties will be more likely to grow. And an individual working at a firm may fare worse by building talents useful only to her current employer, yet if she does, her firm will be able to outcompete others. The cooperative action model helped us to identify and quantify this tension. To see whether group selection can bootstrap, evolve, or maintain cooperation, we need to add more detail to our model. Traulson and Nowak propose an elegant model in which populations grow and new members resemble the high performers. This construction builds in both individual and group selection. Selection occurs at the level of individuals, but higher performers are more likely to come from cooperative groups. When a group becomes sufficiently large, it divides in two, creating a new group. To prevent the population from becoming too large, the formation of a new group causes the eradication of a randomly chosen existing group. 

This last feature builds in a weak form of group selection.^15 These models show that group selection increases cooperation provided that the benefit from cooperative action is relatively large and the maximal group size is small relative to the number of groups. The finding that the efficacy of group selection depends in part on the ratio of maximal group size to the number of groups reveals the necessity of competition. Having more groups implies a greater likelihood of a group of all cooperators. It also implicitly assumes more competition. The more unexpected result is that smaller maximal group size enables more cooperation. A smaller maximal group size prevents groups of cooperators from becoming dominated by defectors; it limits the effects of individual selection. Think back to our group of eight cooperators and two defectors. The defectors perform better. If the group were allowed to grow to size eighty, it would contain a much larger proportion of defectors before the split occurs. If the group splits once it has twelve members, in the 

---

worst-case scenario the group consists of two-thirds cooperators when splitting. The potential for group selection to increase cooperation can be applied within organizations. Most organizations assign compensation based primarily on individual performance. Splitting employees into teams that compete against one another and allocating bonuses and opportunities based on team performance creates the possibility for inducing cooperative behavior. If resources go to teams, individuals have incentives to work well within those 

teams, to cooperate.^16 These incentives should increase cooperation within teams if the benefits from cooperation are high and if the size of teams is small relative to the number of teams. When evaluating the potential for group selection, we must think carefully about the sophistication of the individual actors. Trees adapt slowly, so group selection will not have to operate very fast. People adapt quickly, so if the individual incentives to defect are high, group selection will have to operate at a correspondingly fast rate. People, though, may also recognize the group selection effect. They may take into account the competition among groups and see their self-interest in creating a strong group. This makes cooperation more likely. All this is to suggest that we should be careful not to place too much confidence on a specific constraint that shows cooperation will increase in a particular model. Instead, we should apply our judgment across many models and ask if the qualitative insights hold. 

---

### Summary 

The puzzle of how cooperation takes hold, grows, and is maintained has been studied by thousands of scholars across a range of disciplines. That inquiry has been aided by models, most prominent among them the Prisoners’ Dilemma. If we assume rational actors in a repeated game, the puzzle goes away. Cooperation can be maintained through threat of punishment. Punishment can occur directly through repeated play or indirectly because of reputation. Those mechanisms may explain how cooperation arises in highstakes settings with sophisticated people, but it will not explain why ants, bees, trees, and naked mole rats are so cooperative. When we took up cooperation among rule players, we found that evolving cooperation is not as easy. Rational actors can maintain cooperation in environments in which rule-playing actors cannot evolve it. We also found that unsophisticated rules, such as Tit for Tat, though not optimal, can cooperate with one another and not be exploited. Subsequent work has shown that Tit for Tat performs less well if we assume random mistakes in play. If a mistake occurs and a player defects, two players each using Tit for Tat will produce a cycle of defecting and cooperating actions. If both players accidentally defect, Tit for Tat will result in mutual defection until another mistake occurs. In real Prisoners’ Dilemma games, mistakes happen. On September 1, 1983, Korean Airlines flight 007 drifted into Soviet airspace en route to Seoul, Korea, from Anchorage, Alaska. A Soviet SU-15 shot down the plane, killing all 269 people on board. The United States saw this as a defection by the Soviet Union. The Soviet Union, thinking the plane was on a spy mission, thought this was a defection by the United States. To avoid endless punishments following a mistake, other strategies—such as Win Stay, Lose Shift—are more forgiving. Under this strategy, the mutual cooperation payoff ( _R_ ) and the temptation payoff ( _T_ ) are coded as wins. The other two payoffs are coded as 

---

losses. Win Stay, Lose Shift starts by cooperating; thereafter, if it won, it sticks with whatever it did last period. If it lost, it switches to the other action. By working through some examples, you can see 

how Win Stay, Lose Shift returns to cooperative behavior.^17 We also described two other mechanisms. Clustering can enable cooperation to bootstrap itself. This mechanism relies on cooperators playing one another and having cooperation spread through selection. Group selection operates through a similar logic. Groups of cooperators perform well and replace groups of defectors. If we construct models, we find that cooperation that arises through clustering and group selection requires more stringent conditions than does cooperation through repetition or reputation. We also learned how the success of the various mechanisms depends on how we model the individuals. We should not expect these mechanisms to operate identically for people, ants, and trees. More sophisticated actors may be better able to sustain cooperation by being forward-looking, yet they might also be more likely to see the benefits of defecting when surrounded by cooperators. Most of our discussion has framed cooperation as beneficial. Entities can also cooperate in order to exploit others. Firms form cartels to keep prices artificially high, and countries form coalitions to restrict the supply of a resource, such as oil, for their own benefit, not for the benefit of humanity writ large. Cancer cells cooperate to fight off our immune systems.^18 So as we study cooperation, we should keep in mind that it need not be for the common good. The water buffalo do not benefit from the lions’ cooperative actions. 

---