A cooperative game consists of a set of N players and a value function that assigns a value to any subset S ⊆ N , V ( S ). These subsets are called coalitions. The value of the coalition consisting of no players equals zero, = 0; the value of all N players, V ( N ), equals the total value of the game. 

In a cooperative game, a player’s _last-on-the-bus (LOTB) value_ equals the value she adds if she is the last to join the group. LOTB values capture players’ values at the margin. If four people are hired to move a table, and moving the table produces a value of 10, and all four are needed, then each has a LOTB value of 10. If only three are required, then each has a LOTB value of zero. Notice that LOTB values need not sum to the total value of the game. In particular, if the value function exhibits diminishing returns to scale, then LOTB values sum to less than the total value, and if added values exhibit increasing returns to scale, then the sum of LOTB values exceeds the total value. A player’s _Shapley value_ equals her marginal contribution when she is added to a coalition averaged across all possible orderings in which the coalition of everyone forms. In other words, we imagine adding the players to the coalition in sequence and calculating a player’s added value for each sequence. Consider a small firm that operates in Spain and France and requires one French speaker and one Spanish speaker to conduct daily business. The firm has three employees: a Spanish speaker, a French speaker, and a bilingual person capable of speaking both French and Spanish. Suppose that our cooperative game assigns a value of $1,200 to any set of workers capable of speaking French and Spanish. This amount equals the daily revenue of the firm if it is able to operate. If any two employees show up at the office, the third is not needed. 

---

Therefore, each player has an LOTB value of zero. To compute the Shapley value for the French speaker, we consider all six orderings in which people could arrive to work. In only one of these orderings, the one in which the Spanish speaker arrives first and the French speaker arrives second, does the French speaker add value. Her Shapley value equals times $1,200, or 

$200. The Spanish speaker adds value only if he arrives second and the French speaker arrives first, so his Shapley value also equals $200. In the other four orderings, the bilingual person arrives either first or second and adds value. Her Shapley value therefore equals $800. The sum of the Shapley values equals $1,200, the total value of the game. 

---