A population of N individuals consists of cooperators and defectors connected in a network. Cooperation incurs a cost C and produces a benefit B to the other player for each interaction. Defecting produces no cost or benefit. The ratio of cooperative advantage, , captures the potential gains from cooperation. 

The network plays a key role in allowing cooperation to emerge and even bootstrap itself. A small cluster or group of cooperators who interact mostly with one another perform well and then spread in the population. In an ecosystem, offspring often locate adjacent to parents. If the offspring of cooperators are more likely to be cooperators, then bootstrapping cooperation becomes even easier. To show that clustering can bootstrap cooperation, we start with a partially filled network. Each node on that network is a potential location for an individual. In the biological context, the locations would be feasible habitats. We then populate a portion of the network with individuals who are either cooperators or defectors. We might, for example, first draw a random network with an average degree of 10, then roll a die at each node. If the die comes up six, we place an individual at that node. If not, we leave the node empty. If we do place an individual on a node, we roll the die again. If we roll a five, we place a cooperator on the node. Otherwise, we place a defector. This procedure populates one-sixth of the nodes on our network, and one-sixth of occupied nodes contain cooperators. Given this construction, individuals will differ in their number of neighbors. Some will have no neighbors. Some will have four or five neighbors. To enable the growth or demise of cooperation, we populate the remainder of the network by iteratively filling in the nodes adjacent to occupied nodes. We assume that an empty node 

---

takes the type (i.e., is either a cooperator or a defector) of the highest-performing type among its neighbors. Figure 22.3 shows two segments of linear networks. Cooperators are represented by dark lines, defectors by gray lines, and empty nodes by dashed dark lines. Each segment contains an empty node in the center with two neighbors, one defector and one cooperator. In this figure, cooperating creates a benefit of 2 and imposes a cost of 1. 

Figure 22.3: Payoffs to Neighbors of an Empty Node in Two Linear Networks In the top segment of figure 22.3, the defector to the right of the open node has a cooperating neighbor, so it earns a payoff of 1. The cooperating neighbor to the left of the open node has a defector as a neighbor, so it earns a payoff of -1. Given our rules for node filling, because the defecting neighbor has a higher payoff, the empty node will become a defector. In the bottom segment, the defecting neighbor of the empty cell has a defecting neighbor, while the cooperating neighbor of the empty cell is connected to another cooperator. In the lower segment, therefore, we get the opposite outcome. Here, the cooperating neighbor has the higher payoff, so the empty node will become a cooperator. In this example, a lone cooperator cannot spawn an additional cooperator, but two adjacent cooperators can. It follows that a small cluster of cooperative nodes surrounded by empty cells could expand into open nodes. Therefore, regions of cooperation can emerge from a handful of cooperators. We can write more general conditions about whether an empty cell becomes a cooperator or defector based on the proportions of neighboring cooperators and defectors and the ratio of cooperative advantage. It follows that cooperation becomes easier to bootstrap in networks with lower degree. This finding is the opposite of what we found when analyzing how reputation maintains cooperation, where 

---

a more connected network increases the likelihood of a defection ruining someone’s reputation, so more connections help to maintain cooperation. This provides another example of many-model thinking producing conditional knowledge. The question of whether connected networks produce more or less cooperation has no single answer. If cooperation is maintained by sophisticated actors using reputation, more connected networks will be more cooperative. If cooperation is bootstrapped or evolved among unsophisticated actors, like trees or ants, less connected networks should promote more cooperation. 

---