where P diffuse = P spread · P contact. 

In this model as well, in the long run everyone in the relevant population learns the information. However, in this model, the adoption curve for the diffusion model has an S-shape. Initially, few people are informed; _I_ 0 is small. It follows that the number of 

susceptible people who meet an informed person must also be small. As the number of informed people grows larger, the number of contacts between informed and uninformed people increases, producing larger increases in the number of informed people. When nearly everyone in the relevant population is informed, the number of newly informed people decreases, forming the top of the S-shape. Technological adoption curves often have this shape. For example, adoption curves for hybrid seed in the last century vary by state (Iowans adopted hybrid seeds faster than Alabamans), but all of the curves have an S-shape.^3 In the broadcast model, estimating the relevant population size from data is straightforward. The initial numbers of adopters correlates strongly with the relevant population. In contrast, estimating the size of the relevant population using data from a diffusion model can be difficult. The same increases in product sales could result from a large diffusion probability among a small relevant population or a small diffusion probability among a large population. Figure 11.2 shows data for two hypothetical smartphone applications. On the first day, one hundred people bought each application. For each of the next five days, the first application realizes both higher total sales and larger increases in sales. Absent 

---

a model, we would probably predict the first application to have the larger market. Fitting the model to the two data streams shows the opposite to be true. 

Figure 11.2: Two Adoption Curves for Sales of an Application The first application fits a diffusion probability of 40% and a relevant population of 1,000 people, while the second application corresponds to a diffusion probability of 30% and a relevant population of 1 million people.^4 Within a few days, we would come to realize that there is a larger relevant population for the second application. Nevertheless, absent the model, we would make the incorrect inference about total sales if we based it on just five days of data. When using the diffusion model to guide action, we unpack the probability of diffusion as the product of the probability of sharing and the probability of making contact. To increase the speed of an application’s sales, its developer could increase the rate at which people meet or increase the probability that they share information about the application. Changing the first probability would be difficult. To increase the second probability, the developer could provide incentives for signing up new buyers, which many developers do. A game developer might give points within the game to users who sign up new buyers. Though this would increase the speed of diffusion, it would not affect total sales, at least not according to the model. As mentioned, total sales equals the relevant population size, regardless of the probability of sharing. Increasing the rate of sales produces no long-term effect. Most consumer goods and information spread through both diffusion and broadcast. Our next model, the _Bass model,_ combines 

the two processes in a single model.^5 The difference equation in the Bass model equals the sum of the difference equations from the 

---

broadcast model and the diffusion model. The adoption curve of the Bass model will be more S-shaped the larger the probability of diffusion. The adoption curves for televisions, radios, cars, computers, telephones, and cell phones all are combinations of rshapes and S-shapes. 

---