A population of size N consists of S strong types and W weak types whose costs of sending a signal are c and C respectively, with c < C. Those members of the population who send the signal equally divide a benefit of B > 0. The model has three possible outcomes: 

 Pooling : Both types signal. 

 Separating ( c < and < C ): Strong types signal. 

 Partial pooling ( c < < C < ): Strong types and a fraction of the weak types signal. 

In the model, we assume that individuals make optimal choices given the actions of others. That is, we treat this as a game and solve for an equilibrium. In the pooling equilibrium, everyone sends the signal. This equilibrium exists when the benefit is high and the cost for the weak type to send the signal is low. The exact condition is that the benefit divided by the number of people must exceed the cost for the weak type. Suppose that a benefactor donates $1 million for student scholarships to be split among all graduates of a high school with 100 students. Suppose that 50 of the students are weak and 50 are strong and that a strong student can graduate from high school by studying two hours per week, while a weak student must put in ten hours. We can approximate the costs of studying to be $2,000 for the strong students and $5,000 for the weak students. If all 100 students graduate, each receives a $10,000 scholarship. Given these assumptions, it makes sense for both types of students to study. Suppose, though, that we reduce the size of the scholarship pool to $200,000. Now, if all of the students graduated, each would 

---

receive only $2,000. Studying is no longer in the weak students’ selfinterest. It still makes sense for the strong students, who now each receive $4,000. That amount is still not sufficient to induce even a single weak student to graduate (the second condition in the box above). In this case, the scholarship offer produces separation. Last, suppose that the scholarship pool contains $400,000. Once again, if everyone graduated, the weak students would receive less than their $5,000 cost of studying. It follows that they would not all choose to study. However, if none of them studied, the strong students would each receive $10,000. That amount would be enticing to the weak students. In equilibrium exactly 30 of the weak students graduate along with all 50 strong students. In total, 80 students graduate, and each receives $5,000, the costs of studying for a weak student. We refer to this outcome as partial pooling, as only a portion of the weak students pool with the strong students. The partial pooling equilibrium is more complicated than the others as it requires coordination among the weak students. We could assume that there exists some process by which weaker students communicate to others that they plan to take actions that ensure graduation. Or, we could assume that the weaker students put in just enough effort so that whether they graduate is a random event such that, on average, 30 of them graduate. This second scenario seems less plausible. In general, we should interpret partial pooling equilibria as benchmarks, as what would happen if people optimized. Whether a partial pooling equilibrium is attained likely depends on the situation, in particular, on whether people can communicate intended actions. 

---

### Continuous Signals 

In the partial pooling equilibrium of the discrete signals model, the strong types may feel frustration. If they could send a strong signal, they could separate fully from the weak types and earn a higher payoff. To include that possibility in the model, we can alter our assumptions and allow the strong types to choose the magnitude of the signal they send. This requires only slight modification in our model. We reinterpret the costs of sending the discrete signal as a cost per unit of the continuous signal. We assume that for any fixed amount of the signal, the strong types have a lower per-unit cost of signaling. To create separation in this new model, the strong types must be willing to choose a magnitude that is prohibitively costly for the weak types, yet still worth sending given the benefits and the costs. Reasoning through the model, we find that at least some of the strong types, though not necessarily all, can separate themselves from the weaker types. Surprisingly, the magnitude of the signal the strong types must send becomes smaller as the size of the strong group increases. This occurs because the benefits to a weak type of sending the signal decrease in the size of the strong group. Being part of a larger group provides fewer benefits. The condition for full separation implies that it will be more likely when there are few strong types or when the strong types have much lower costs of signaling. 

---