Our well-being rests atop a centuries-long accumulation of knowledge that includes the laws of physics, the combustion engine, double-entry accounting, the germ theory of disease, Xrays, and HTML. Knowledge is often a public good. Knowledge is always non-rival. It may or may not be excludable. Exclusion requires verification, which is easier when a physical artifact embeds the knowledge. Verifying that someone used an algorithm or technique for solving a problem may be impossible. Verifying that someone embedded that algorithm in a software program is not. When knowledge can be excluded, we confront a choice. We could treat knowledge like roads and national defense, and tax people to fund its production. Governments pay people to think through grants and indirectly by supporting universities. Governments also allow people to patent knowledge. A patent creates an incentive to produce knowledge by creating a period of exclusive rights to use the knowledge and to charge others for its use. In the United States and Europe, patents last twenty 

years from the date of filing.^6 Advocates of patents argue that private entities would have little incentive to spend years developing a better mousetrap, computer algorithm, or sound system if their discoveries could be used by anyone for free. They argue that patents overcome the incentive problems inherent in knowledge production. Boldrin and Levine construct an argument that borrows ideas from several models to argue against patents.^7 In models in which ideas can be combined, patents can hinder innovation by limiting recombinations. One firm’s patent on touch-screen technology may reduce the number of other firms that design new products that incorporate that technology. Absent patent protection, the technology could be incorporated into more 

---

products. Innovation would increase. Proponents of patents push back by noting that while slowing innovation may be bad, without patents the reduction in investment would be much larger. To counter that claim, Boldrin and Levine use a logic partly based on our diffusion model. A useful product based on new knowledge will spread quickly through the population of buyers. That was true of the radio, television, Google’s search engine, and Facebook. This creates a _first-mover advantage_. The innovator can still benefit, but only by producing something with the idea. With a patent, an inventor can wait for others to implement the idea and profit. Boldrin and Levine also question how much credit the inventor deserves anyway. If breakthroughs were the result of a solitary genius, and most ideas would never have been produced without incentives, then the case for patents is stronger. The rugged landscape model suggests that difficult problems may have multiple workable solutions. New inventions, particularly those that combine existing ideas and technology such as the car, the telephone, and online auctions, may be natural occurrences not acts of genius. Any number of people might have made these innovations given the ideas swirling around in the community of thinkers. The simultaneity of major discoveries—calculus (Isaac Newton and Gottfried Leibniz), the telephone (Alexander Graham Bell and Elisha Gray), and the natural selection theory of evolution (Charles Darwin and Alfred Russel Wallace)—supports that inference. In sum, many-model thinking shows advantages and disadvantages to patents. The deeper, more nuanced understanding the models provide argues for a more flexible patent policy. Perhaps some ideas—those that many people might have discovered and those that could recombine with other ideas—should have different lengths or types of patents, or even not be patentable at all. 

---