Markov Model The population can be divided into four income (or wealth) categories with equal numbers of people. We can estimate the transition probability that an individual (or family) in one category moves to another category within a generation, as shown in the figure below. More equal transition probabilities correspond to greater social mobility. 

 Transition Probabilities Between Income Levels Cause of inequality: Social skills, tacit knowledge, attitudes toward risk and education, and bequests reduce mobility between income classes. 

If there were no stickiness across generations, then the income of the child of a high-income parent would be equally likely to belong to any of the four income classes—all of the transition probabilities equal. In the most extreme case of no mobility, transition probabilities would consist of only 1s along the diagonal. Empirical estimates suggest that the reality lies between these extremes. We can run experiments by taking 100 randomly selected lowor high-income families and computing the probability distribution of incomes in subsequent generations. Using the probabilities shown in the box, the children of high-income parents have a 60% chance of being high-income and only a 5% chance of being low-income. The grandchildren of the high-income parent have less than a 43% 

---

chance of being high-income and more than a 10% chance of being 

low-income.^14 The income dynamics model also serves as a baseline from which to evaluate the causes of income mobility. We might use a linear model to estimate a child’s income as a function of parental wealth, parental income, and parental ability levels (assuming we had data). The Piketty model would imply a positive coefficient on parental wealth. The ability-based model would imply a positive coefficient on parental ability given that there exists some correlation between parental ability and ability of offspring. Note that determining the coefficient on parental income requires data on the income of each child and each parent. Scholars have individual-level income data only for the past few decades. In _The Son Also Rises,_ Gregory Clark (2014) found a novel solution to the problem of lack of data: he relies on surnames. He calculates the average income of everyone named, say, Thatcher, in 1888 and compares this to the average income of everyone named Thatcher in 

1917. The thirty-year increment represents the length of a work life. He finds substantial correlation across surnames’ average incomes, suggesting a lack of income mobility.     This type of model allows us to identify racial differences in intergenerational transfers. African Americans exhibit less persistence of wealth at the top of the income distribution and more persistence at the low end. A wealthy African American will be less likely to have wealthy children, and a poor African American will be more likely to have poor children.^15     Our last model based on neighborhood effects, Durlauf’s _persistent inequality model,_ leverages the empirical regularity that people segregate by income category—that is, high-income people live in communities with other high-income people and low-income people live near low-income people. Segregation by income produces economic, sociological, and psychological externalities that reduce mobility. In the model, an individual’s income depends on ability, educational spending, and spillovers.     The educational attribute captures public spending on education, 

---

which empirically correlates with average income: high-income locations spend more on education than low-income locations, resulting in better educational outcomes and higher incomes for children in high-income neighborhoods. The spillover term can be interpreted as socially transmitted knowledge of appropriate tools to acquire. Here we can link Durlauf’s model to how people who live in high-income communities gain awareness of appropriate tools. We can also link the model to our network model and the _strength of weak ties_ phenomenon: people who live in high-income communities will be connected indirectly to more people with access to economically valuable information. This will produce a positive feedback on income. We can also interpret the spillover as socially transmitted behaviors, such as the number of hours spent studying or working. If income includes a random component, then a person in a lowincome community will see (correctly) a low return to time spent on self-improvement. Relatedly, the spillover could include psychological attributes—a positive or negative outlook on life, a feeling of safety, or a belief in oneself. 

---