**Linear model + rule of 72:** From 1960 to 1970 Japan’s GDP grew at a 10% annual rate. A linear projection of continued 10% increases would result in a doubling of the Japanese economy every seven years (using the rule of 72). In 1970, Japanese per capita GDP was approximately $2,000 in current US dollars. Had that trend continued, by 2012 per capita GDP would have doubled six times, resulting in a per capita GDP of $128,000. 

**Growth model:** This model explains Japanese growth as due to investments in physical capital. The model predicts _concave_ growth rates over time. The growth model predicts that as Japan’s GDP approached that of the United States and Europe, its growth rate should decrease to the historical cross-country 

average of 1–2%.^18 The evidence supports this. From 1970 to 1990 Japan’s GDP grew at around 4% annually. From 1990 to 2017, it grew at 1% or less. 

**Chinese growth:** China’s GDP grew at nearly a 10% rate from 1990 to 2010. In 2016, the per capita GDP in China reached approximately $8,000, and as predicted by the growth model, growth has slowed, with GDP growing at closer to 6% from 2013 to 2017. In China as well, sustained 10% growth rates run afoul of the rule of 72. If Chinese economic growth averaged 10% for the next century, per capita GDP would exceed $100 million. 

---

### It’s a Nonlinear World After All 

We construct nonlinear models because few phenomena of interest are linear. In this chapter we saw how diminishing and increasing returns are common features of economic, physical, biological, and social phenomena. We also saw some of the implications of including curvature in our models. Most important, perhaps, we saw how functional forms structure our thinking and then how fitting functional forms to data allows us to make precise statements. Scientists can compute the age of artifacts using carbon-14 data. Economists can estimate the long-term effects of small increases in growth. A central takeaway from this chapter is that intuition becomes insufficient once we include nonlinearities. Intuition tells us the direction of effects: growth is increased by a rise in savings, an increase in labor, and technological innovation. Models reveal the shape and form of those effects. Savings, as we would expect, have a linear effect. Increases in labor do as well in the long run, even though the model assumes short-run diminishing returns. Increases in innovation produce a multiplier effect: we get the square of those effects. The first increase is the direct effect of the innovation. The second increase in output arises from the increase in capital. Insights such as these become clear with the help of models. Without models, we can usually infer what goes up and what goes down, but we lack understanding of the shape of functional relationships. As a result, we often make linear extrapolations— China’s economy will soon take over the world. With models, we can better think through the logic that produces nonlinear effects. The set of nonlinear functions is enormous. The concave and convex models we covered in this chapter represent but a small dip in that vast sea. If we hope to improve our capacity to reason, explain, and act in a complex world, we need an even deeper dive into nonlinear phenomena. 

---