Individuals vote for or against undertaking the project. If a majority vote for the project, the project is undertaken and each pays a cost. As the following example shows, this mechanism can violate efficiency and voluntary participation. 

We know from the spatial voting model that whether or not the project is undertaken depends on the preferences of the median voter. In this case, that will be the person with the median value for the public project. By construction, the mechanism satisfies the budget balance condition and incentive compatibility. However, the mechanism need not satisfy either efficiency or voluntary participation as can be seen in an example. Suppose that there exist three people with values $0, $120, and $150 for a public project that costs $300. The efficient outcome is that the project should not be undertaken because the total cost of $300 exceeds the sum of the individual values. However, given that costs will be split equally, each person votes on whether to undertake the project at a cost of $100 each. It follows that two of the three individuals will vote for the project, and it will be undertaken, the inefficient outcome. Moreover, the individual with value $0 receives a payoff of -$100, so the example also violates voluntary participation. In our second mechanism, the _pivot mechanism,_ each individual submits a valuation for the project. If the sum of the valuations exceeds the cost of the project, the project is undertaken. Otherwise it is not. The amount that the individual will be taxed equals the cost of the project minus the sum of all of the other individuals’ valuations. If the valuations of the other individuals exceed the cost of the project, the individual pays nothing. 

---