To test whether a network with N nodes and E edges is random, we create a large number of random networks with N nodes and E edges and calculate distributions for degree, path length, clustering coefficient, and betweenness. We then perform standard statistical tests to accept or reject the hypothesis that the network’s statistics could have been drawn from the simulated distributions.^4 

Theoretical models often assume a particular network structure. Many assume random networks, while others assume regular geographic networks such as when the nodes are arranged in a circle and each is connected to the nearest nodes in each direction. Other geographic networks arrange the nodes on a checkerboard and connect each node to its neighbors to the north, south, east, and west. Most of the common geographic networks have low degree— they connect to only the local neighbors—and relatively high average path length. On geographic networks, betweenness and clustering coefficient have no variation. A third common type of network, a _power-law network,_ has a power-law degree distribution. A handful of nodes has many connections, but most nodes have very few networks. A fourth type of network, a _small-world network_ , combines features of geographic and random networks.^5 To construct a small-world network, we begin with a geographic network and then “rewire” it by randomly selecting an edge and replacing one of the nodes it connects with a random node. If the rewiring probability equals zero, we have a geographic network. If it equals 1, we have a random network. In between, we have a small-world network, distinguished by small clusters from the geographic network connected by random links to other clusters. Social networks look similar to small worlds. Each person has a 

---

cluster of friends as well as random friends. 

 Figure 10.2: Random, Geographic, Power-Law, and Small-World Networks 

---

### Network Formation: Logic 

We now briefly describe models of network formation. These models provide logic to explain network structures. Most of the network structures that we encounter _emerge_ from choices of individual actors to make connections. That is true of friendship networks, the World Wide Web, and power grids. These networks are not planned. Other networks, such as supply chain networks, do result from planning. We would expect planned networks to be robust to the failure of nodes. The fact that emergent network structures are robust is more of a puzzle. We have already discussed how to create random networks and small-world networks. We create the former by randomly creating a set of nodes and then drawing edges connecting random pairs of nodes. We create a small-world network by first constructing a regular geographic network (often by arranging nodes in a circle and connecting _k_ neighbors in each direction) and then randomly “rewiring” a proportion of the edges. Models of the formation of the power grid rely on economic and engineering principles. The network must deliver power to homes, businesses, and the government. Whether the producers are forprofit companies or public utilities, they have little incentive to create high clustering, as it would be inefficient. This lack of clusters reduces the robustness of the network. Economic and engineering considerations also rule out long leaps: connections that reach far across the network. Power companies do not build direct connections from Chicago to Dallas. People and businesses, however, do. A Chicagoan might strike up a friendship with someone from Dallas. A firm in Singapore might trade with a firm in Detroit. As we see in the next section, these long leaps contribute to network robustness. To create a network with a long-tailed distribution, we can apply a version of the preferential attachment model. We create nodes randomly and then draw edges from new nodes to existing nodes. If 

---

we let the probability of connecting to a node be proportional to its degree, we produce a power-law degree distribution. In that model, early-arriving nodes will be far more likely to be of high degree. A shortcoming of the model is that it does not allow for any difference in node quality. Higher quality nodes should have higher degree. The _quality and degree network formation model_ corrects that omission while also producing a long-tailed distribution. 

---