Systems Dynamics Model A population of people in pain produces opioid users and addicts. People on opioids flow into the no-pain state and also flow into the addict state. Addicts, in turn, can become heroin users. One reason that people use heroin is that they can no longer get opioids. Thus, as the flow of opioids increases, so does the number of heroin users. 

A possible final model, which we do not write down formally, relies on social networks to explain why maps of per-capita opioid use show clustering in rural counties. From our analysis of the square root rules, we know that smaller populations should have higher variation. (Recall the example of the best and worst performing schools being small.) Higher use in rural areas could also be due to doctors writing longer prescriptions for rural patients who live farther from pharmacies. Those explanations aside, the clustering exceeds what would occur randomly. Clustering could arise if people provide or sell opioids to neighbors. Unlike used furniture, which people can sell by placing ads, opioids most often sell through personal connections. A model of opioid selling would assume a social network of family and friends within which people distribute opioids. Such a model would produce the local clusters of opioid abusers seen in data.^3 

---

Figure 29.1: Income Shares of the Top 0.1% 1916–2010. Source: Piketty 2011. 

---

### Many Models of Inequality 

Our final many-model exercise delves relatively deep and wide into the causes of economic inequality. We undertake this effort for three reasons. First, inequality is one of the most important policy issues of our time. Income and wealth correlate with human flourishing. Higher-income individuals enjoy better health, longer life expectancy, and higher life satisfaction and happiness. Those at the bottom of the income distribution experience higher rates of homicide, divorce, mental illness, and anxiety.^4 We must be careful not to confuse correlation with causation: a substantial part of this correlation can be explained by the fact that healthier, happier people earn more money. Nevertheless, almost all studies show a connection between income and flourishing. No one prefers to be poorer. Second, we have a plethora of models of inequality written by a diversely tooled collection of economists, sociologists, political scientists, and even physicists and biologists. Third, we have abundant data on income and wealth within and across countries. We have both current data and time series stretching back hundreds of years. We start by summarizing some empirical regularities. First, in all countries at all times, the distribution of income has an elongated tail, with many low-income people and a small percentage of people who earn large incomes. Historically, income distributions were calibrated to lognormal distribution or Pareto distributions. Recently, more granular data reveals the tail to be longer than lognormal, though not quite that described by a power law. Wealth distribution is similarly skewed. Second, within most developed countries, income and wealth inequality, however measured, have been rising in recent decades. Current levels of income and wealth inequality in the United States approach those of the Gilded Age. Shifts in entire distributions can be hard to discern, so, following convention, we describe those shifts with respect to the share of income that goes to the upper tail of the distribution. Figure 29.1 shows how the top 0.1% has increased its 

---

share of income. The share of income to the top 0.1% of families fell steadily through 1950, and remained stable at less than 4% until around 1980, when it began to climb. In 2018, the proportion of total wealth own by these super rich was around 10%. Third, globally, the number of people living in poverty has dropped precipitously. We should see no logical contradiction in these opposing trends. Fast-rising incomes in poor countries reduce crosscountry differences and more than offset within-country increases in inequality. Our model of group selection produced similar effects. The growth in the number of altruistic communities outpaced the trend toward selfishness within each community. Inequality has multiple, interwoven causes. Economic forces, sociological trends, exercises of political power, and the weight of history all contribute to disparities. Thus, as Steven Durlauf points out, we should not try to explain the levels or trends in disparities 

with a single equation. Nor should we base policy on one.^5 We must be nuanced in our thinking. The processes concentrating wealth and income in the top 1% or top 0.1% may be unrelated to the forces trapping the bottom 20% in a cycle of poverty. To understand the disparate causes, we need many models. We start by describing models that explain the changing distribution of income. Income has four sources: wages and salaries, business income, capital income, and capital gains. The relative sizes of those shares varies with income level. Low-income people earn few capital gains or capital income. Many of the highest earners receive substantial income from every category. They earn income from wages, businesses, and capital. Our first model extends the Cobb-Douglas production model to include two types of labor: educated and uneducated. The wage paid to a type of labor depends on the relative supply of that type and on technology.^6 This model explains the recent rise in inequality based on supply and demand. During the 1950s, the rise in manufacturing increased demand for uneducated workers. At the same time, increased college enrollments due in part to the GI Bill increased the supply of educated workers. In the 1980s, decreased incentives to 

---

attend college slowed the growth in the number of college graduates, and a subsequent inflow of immigrants with low education levels increased the supply of low-skilled workers. At the same time, technological changes—the rise of automated manufacturing and the transition to a more digital economy—increased the relative value of educated workers, and their rising wages reflected this value. Time series data on average incomes by education level fit this model reasonably well. For this reason, many economists rely on the model to guide policy. The model advocates increasing access to education, as that will depress the wages of educated workers and reduce inequality. This model explains broad trends well, but it cannot explain the increase in variation within each income class. 

---