Each entity in a population of size N randomly takes an initial positive (+1) or a negative (-1) action. The initial state of the system , S 0 , is set equal to zero. All future states of the system, St , equal the average action plus a random variable: 

 Each entity i has a response threshold Ti > 0 drawn uniformly from the interval [0, RANGE]. An entity takes the same action as before if the magnitude of the state, | St |, is less than its threshold and takes an action to reduce the magnitude of the state otherwise. 

 If | St |≤ Ti , Ai ( t + 1) = Ai ( t ), otherwise Ai ( t + 1) = -sign Si ( t ) where εt is randomly drawn from {-1, +1}. 

Multiple applications of the ping-pong model should come to mind. Here are two. People allocate time and resources to multiple charitable causes. If cause receives too much attention or money, people may donate money to other charities to equalize their revenues. Or a country may have two UNESCO World Heritage sites that rely on volunteers. If one site has an abundance of volunteers, then some may reallocate their energies to the other site. As foreshadowed by the name, the ping-pong model can produce cyclic behavior around the equilibrium. In one period too many people choose one action, and in the next too many choose the other. When all entities have a threshold of zero, all entities choose action one (+1) in one period and action minus one (-1) in the next. To explore how threshold diversity contributes to whether people behave like ping-pong balls or find an equilibrium, we consider three 

---

cases, each involving 100 people. In the first case, we assume thresholds are uniformly distributed between zero and 10. If the state in the first period equals -6, it will exceed the threshold of approximately 60 people. Approximately 30 of these 60 will have taken action one and will switch actions. The sum of the actions will now exceed 50, so the new state of the system (the average of the previous two periods) will exceed 20. This value exceeds all thresholds, producing the ping-pong effect shown in the top graph in figure 19.6. If we increase the threshold diversity making them uniformly distributed between zero and 100, the ping-pong effect all but disappears. To see why, assume that the state equals -6 in the first period. On average, only six people’s thresholds will be met. If three change actions, the state will move toward zero. This dampening of the deviation can be seen in the bottom graph in figure 19.6, which corresponds to thresholds between zero and 100. As we might expect, if we consider a moderate case, with thresholds uniformly distributed between zero and 60, we see a more moderate cycle, as visible in the middle graph. Thus, in systems with negative feedbacks, threshold diversity produces stability, but it has the opposite effect in the models with positive feedbacks. 

 Figure 19.6: Time Series for Ping-Pong Model for Three Threshold Ranges 

---

### Summary: Model Granularity 

The basic logic of feedbacks is straightforward: positive feedbacks reinforce actions, negative feedbacks dampen them. A system with only positive feedbacks will either blow up or collapse. A system with only negative feedbacks will either stabilize or cycle. A system with both positive feedbacks and negative feedbacks has the potential to produce complexity. In systems dynamics models, feedbacks operate on stock variables (the number of hares) and rates (increasing the rate of purchases at the bakery). Agent-based models, such as the threshold models we covered here, produce feedbacks as a result of individual actions. These more granular models can include a diversity of thresholds, which exacerbates the effects of positive feedbacks and tempers negative feedbacks. Diversity in the tail of the distribution made riots much more likely. Diversity in tolerance thresholds increased segregation. Diversity of responses in systems with negative feedbacks stopped the wild fluctuations that existed with homogeneous feedbacks. In models of economic competition among firms, heterogeneous production costs can play a similar function. As prices rise or fall, firms vary in their responses owing to their differences in costs.^4 This difference between the two types of models raises the issue of model granularity. Does one create a variable (or box) labeled “hares” and describe how the number of hares increases and decreases as a function of other variables, or does one model each hare individually? Disaggregating variables increases descriptive accuracy, but models are not graded on that criterion. Remember Box’s dictum that all models are wrong, and Borges’s map that was the same scale as the real world. Many modelers, including Einstein, have taken the position that we should seek the correct level of granularity. If writing a model to explain the force that is exerted by a human arm, for example, we need not include DNA. For studying social systems, no ideal level may exist. We may 

---

need to explore them at multiple levels of granularity. By constructing multiple models, each at a distinct granularity, we can engage in a dialogue across those models. If we are attempting to make sense of trade patterns between Sweden and Finland, we could start with the two countries as variables and identify broad macro patterns. We might then disaggregate each country’s imports and exports into industries, and then into firms within those industries. Industry-level data would enable us to better explain past patterns and make more precise predictions of future patterns. The deeper dive into firms within those industries, including information such as their cost structures and growth trajectories, could produce even better results, but we would need a lot of information to construct a useful model with that many moving parts. We might even model the leadership within those firms. Most likely, this last level of unpacking would yield few benefits, but it could be that some leaders are known to pursue expansionist strategies. To summarize, finer granularity need not be better. Models can have too much detail. Even when we can understand more granular models, we benefit from constructing coarser models as a point of comparison. By comparing the differences in the models’ predictions, explanations, and policy prescriptions, we see how assumptions affect results. We see the conditionality of our assumptions. Thus, our many models should not only differ in the variables they include, they should also differ in the extent to which they disaggregate the same variables. 

---

---