Preferential Attachment Model There exist N producers, and each begins with zero sales. The first consumer buys from a random producer with zero sales, giving that producer positive sales. Each subsequent consumer with probability p buys from a producer with zero sales and with probability (1 − p ) buys from a producer with positive sales. When buying from a producer with positive sales, a customer selects randomly, with the probability of choosing a particular producer that is proportional to that producer’s sales. 

 Cause of inequality : Increased connectedness increases social influences, creating a positive feedback. 

We can apply that same logic to the economy writ large.^10 The potential for positive feedbacks through social networks to contribute to inequality depends in part on the nature of what people buy. Weightless goods such as movie and music downloads, web applications, and some technologies can be scaled quickly, if not immediately. Tractors, cars, and washing machines cannot be duplicated by clicking on an icon. So while a new smartphone application can scale up with little to no capital outlay, a best-selling car cannot. As a benchmark, in May 2015, Volvo announced that it would build its S60 sedan in South Carolina. The company broke ground on the plant in September 2015 with the expectation that the first cars would roll off the line in late 2018. Our next model applies the spatial voting model to explain the rise in CEO pay, which is not determined by social forces. In 2012, the average income of a CEO at a Fortune 500 company exceeded $10 million, or roughly 300 times the average pay of a worker. By comparison, in 1966, the CEO made only about 25 times the average worker’s salary. CEOs in other countries earn much less. In 

---

Japan, CEOs earn about 10 times what the average worker does. In Canada and throughout Europe, CEOs earn approximately 20 times the pay of the average worker. At most companies, the CEO’s pay is set by a compensation committee consisting of members of the board of directors. That pay includes salary, bonuses, and stock options. The people who determine the pay of CEOs are often other CEOs. They have an incentive for the pay of other CEOs to be high in order to drive up their own pay. We can use the spatial model to represent the preferences of the compensation committee. According to the spatial model, the salary will be set at the median voter’s preferences. The difference in CEO pay by country can be explained by the composition of boards and the compensation committees. In Germany, boards of directors include workers, who prefer that the CEO be paid less. 

---