A sequence of objects (people) arrive one after another. The first arrival creates an entity. Each subsequent arrival applies the following rule: With probability p (small), the arrival forms a new entity. With probability (1 −p ), the arrival joins an existing entity. The probability of joining a particular entity equals its size divided by the number of arrivals to date. 

Imagine students coming onto a college campus. The first student creates a new club. With some small probability, the second student creates her own club. More likely, she joins the first student’s club. The first ten students might create three clubs: one with seven members, one with two members, and one containing a single member. The eleventh arrival will, with small probability, create a fourth club. If not, she will join an existing club. When joining an existing club, she chooses the club with seven students 70% of the time, the club with two students 20% of the time, and the club with one student 10% of the time. The preferential attachment model helps explain why the distributions of links on the World Wide Web, city sizes, firm sizes, book sales, and academic citations are power laws. In each setting, an action (say, a person buys a book) increases the likelihood others will do the same. If the probability of buying from a firm is proportional to its current market share, and if new firms enter at a low rate, then the model predicts that the distribution of firm sizes will 

---

be a power law. The same logic applies to book sales, music downloads, and city growth. Our second model, the _self-organized criticality model,_ produces a power-law distribution through a process that builds interdependencies in a system until the systems reaches a critical state. A variety of self-organized criticality models exist. The _sand pile model_ assumes that someone drops grains of sand onto a table from a spot several feet above. As the grains accumulate, a pile forms. Eventually, the pile attains a _critical state_ where additional grains can cause avalanches. At this critical state, additional grains often have no effect or cause at most a few grains to fall. These are the many small events in a power-law distribution. Sometimes the addition of a single grain results in a large avalanche. These are the large events. A second model, the _forest fire model,_ assumes a twodimensional grid on which trees can grow. Trees can also be hit by random lightning strikes. When the density of the trees is low, any fires caused by lightning will be small, affecting at most a few cells. When the density of trees is high, a fire started by a lightning strike will spread across much of the grid. 

---