In a _pure coordination game_ , each player chooses one of two actions, _A_ or _B_. If both players choose the same action, each receives a payoff of 1. If they choose different actions, each receives a payoff of zero. 

**Actions** : **A A: 1** , 1 **B: 0** , 0 

**Actions** : **B A: 0** , 0 **B: 1** , 1 

A pure coordination game has two efficient equilibria: both players choose _A_ or both players choose _B_. It also has an inefficient equilibrium, in which each player randomizes between _A_ and _B_. We can reinterpret the local majority model with each cell being a player who must choose a common action to play against her eight neighbors. If players can change their action only when randomly activated, a player could increase her payoff by choosing the action that matches a majority of her neighbors’ actions. Such a strategy is called a _myopic best response_ because it does not take into account the likely future actions of the neighbors. A player with five neighbors who have chosen _B_ could increase her payoff in the short term by switching from _A_ to _B_ , but if the player and her neighbors are surrounded by a sea of other players choosing _A_ , then she might have a higher expected payoff by staying with _A_. The key takeaway is that the behavioral rule in the local majority model, though an assumed rule, can be rooted in a game theoretic model. 

---

The _paradox of coordination_ explains differences across groups as idiosyncratic. For some actions—whether your soy sauce or ketchup is stored in the cupboard or in the refrigerator, or whether people wear their shoes in your house or leave them at the door—it is sensible to coordinate with others. The resulting regional variety adds richness to our lives. The tiny ristretto in Italy, the midsized espresso in France, and the enormous _kawa ze smietanka_ (coffee with cream) in Warsaw add to the pleasure of traveling around Europe. Other differences, though, can be inefficient. Variations of electrical plugs—two prongs here, three prongs there—can be maddening. As the world becomes more integrated, technological coordination failures can be costly. The Swedes decided to switch from driving on the left to driving on the right to match the rest of continental Europe. The switchover, known as Dagen H, occurred at 4:45 a.m. on September 3, 1967. Every car in Sweden—and many Swedes were on the road in the early morning hours to participate in the event—came to an abrupt stop, and then, over the next fifteen minutes, all of the cars maneuvered from the left to the right side of the road. At 5:00 a.m., the cars began moving again on the opposite side of the road. Despite the incentives to coordinate, sometimes people fail to do so. The people of England, though connected by tunnel to the continent, continue to drive on the “wrong” side of the road, as do the island inhabitants of some, though not all, of their former colonies. 

---