The derivation _R_ 0 , the basic reproduction number, assumes 

random mixing: in each time step, individuals in the population randomly meet one another. As noted above, the random mixing assumption may approximate airborne diseases or diseases spread by touch, but it makes less sense for diseases that spread through sexual contact. If we embed the SIR model on a network, we see the importance of the degree distribution to disease spread. Here, we compare a _rectangular grid network_ (a checkerboard)— where each node is connected to the nodes to the north, south, east, and west—to a _hub-and-spoke network_ where a hub node connects to all other nodes. Assume that a disease randomly occurs at a node. We set _P_ contact = 1 within the network so that each person makes 

contact with everyone to whom he is connected. In the next period, the disease potentially spreads to each neighbor independently with a given probability corresponding to the virulence of the disease. First consider the rectangular grid network. In each period, the disease can spread to any of the four nodes to the north, south, east, and west. If the probability of the disease spreading exceeds , we would expect the disease to spread. If we look ahead one period, we see that if one new node caught the disease, then that node has three possible neighbors who could catch the disease. If two neighbors, those to the north and east of the original node, caught the disease, then there exist six nodes to which the disease could spread. This network, therefore, does not seem to have much of an effect on the likelihood of disease spread. 

---

Next, consider the hub-and-spoke network. The first node to get the disease could be the hub or a spoke. If the hub catches the disease, then it could spread the disease to any one of the spokes. We would expect the disease to spread, even for a low probability of spreading. If a spoke caught the disease, then the only possible node that could catch the disease is the hub. And as we just learned, if the hub catches the disease, the disease will spread even for low probabilities of spreading. For the hub-and-spoke network, _R_ 0 is less informative 

because if the hub catches the disease, the disease will spread. Epidemiologists refer to high-degree hub people as _superspreaders_. Superspreaders contributed to the early spread of both HIV and SARS.^10 A superspreader need not be extremely social or well connected. A superspreader may have an occupation—tollbooth operator, bank teller, dental hygienist —that puts him in contact with people who belong to distinct social networks. Mary Mallon (Typhoid Mary) worked as a cook in New York at the turn of the twentieth century. She moved from family to family infecting each with typhoid fever. Once discovered as the source, Mary was quarantined against her will. To derive the effect of high-degree nodes, we note first that a high-degree node is both better able to spread the disease and more likely to catch it. A person with three times as many friends as another will be three times as likely to catch the disease and able to spread it three times as widely. His total contribution to the spread of the disease will therefore be nine times that of the other. Thus, a node’s contribution to the spread of a disease (or an idea) correlates with the square of the node’s degree. If node _A_ has a degree _K_ times larger than node _B_ , then node _A_ will be _K_ times as likely to spread the disease 

---

and spread it to _K_ times as many others as _B_. Its total effect will 

be _K_^2 times larger than _B_ ’s, a phenomenon known as _degree squaring_. 

---

### One-to-Many 

Though the SIR model was designed to examine the spread of diseases, we can apply it to social phenomena that spread by diffusion and then fade: books, songs, dance steps, phrases, websites, diets, and exercise regimens. We can estimate probabilities of contact, spread, and recovery and basic reproduction numbers in these contexts as well. The model implies that small changes in these probabilities could spell the difference between success and failure by moving the basic reproduction number above zero. Success can hinge on what John Updike, in describing Ted Williams’s last at-bat, called the “tissue-thin difference between a thing done well and a thing done ill.”^11 Suppose that you think up a new joke. Making the joke a little bit funnier might push the basic reproduction number above 1 and cause the joke to spread. The same logic applies to the stickiness of ideas. If an idea sticks in people’s minds a little longer, the recovery rate will be lower, increasing the basic reproduction number. Not all cases lie on the threshold. The Beatles had enormous talent. Their reproduction number surely exceeded 1 by a large amount. That is of course conjecture. For current pop stars, we can use internet downloads to estimate basic reproduction numbers. Pop star Justin Bieber had an estimated _R_ 0 of 24, making him more 

virulent than the measles.^12 In the SIR model, we derived two critical thresholds, _R_ 0 and the 

vaccination threshold. These thresholds are _contextual tipping points,_ at which small changes in the environment (the context) have large effects on the outcomes. These differ from _direct tipping points,_ where small actions at a particular moment in time forever alter the path of a system. Direct tips occur at unstable points, such as when a ball is perched atop a hill. A small push in either direction sends the ball down one side of the hill or the other. That small push is a direct tip.^13 At a contextual tipping point, a change in a parameter changes 

---

how the system behaves. At a direct tipping point, the trajectory of future outcomes takes a sharp turn. A kink, such as the first bend in the S-shaped adoption curve produced by the diffusion model, satisfies neither definition of tipping point. The kink in the adoption curve corresponds to the point where the slope has maximal increase. At that point, the diffusion is well under way. No tip occurs. Figure 11.3 shows the number of users of Google+ in its first two 

weeks.^14 A kink in the graph occurs six days after the release. By that time, the process of diffusion was well under way. It is not the case that Google+ struggled early and that a direct tip occurred on day six, with the result that within two weeks Google+ had over 16 million users. This conflation of tips with sharp upturns leads to an overuse of the term _tipping point_. Moments identified in the news media and on the internet as tipping points rarely satisfy the formal definition. 

Figure 11.3: A Kink (Not a Tip) in the Number of Google+ Users We can also think of obesity as an epidemic. Though people cannot catch obesity the way they might catch a cold, they can be socially influenced to adopt behaviors that contribute to obesity.^15 To reverse the obesity epidemic we must lower its basic reproduction number, which can be accomplished by decreasing the probabilities of contact or sharing or increasing the probability of recovery. The SIR model applied to obesity, school dropout rates, or crime is not better than economic or sociological models. It is a different model, so it produces different explanations and predictions. It also possibly points to different actions or policies. It contributes to an ensemble of models that help us make sense of the world. It is not a golden arrow that will solve the problem. 

---

In applying models of broadcast, diffusion, and contagion to social phenomena, we may find that some assumptions hold and others do not. In the spread of a disease, each contact has an independent probability of spreading the disease. In social domains, contagion may become more likely with more exposure because adoption is a choice. We do not choose the flu. We catch it. We do choose to buy tight-fitting jeans. As more people wear tight jeans, we may become more likely to as well. Similar logic applies to the choice to become involved in a social movement, to adopt a new technology, or to get a tattoo. In these cases, as well as in the contagion of beliefs or of trusting behavior, we may have to emend the model to allow for the possibility that the probability of adoption per exposure increases 

with more exposures.^16 Such modifications are often necessary when broadening the set of applications of a model. 

---