Let R ( t ) denote the amount of a renewable resource at the start of period t. Let C ( t ) equal the total amount consumed in period t , and g denote the growth rate of the resource. The amount of the resource in period t + 1 is given by the following difference equation:^11 

### R ( t + 1) = (1 + g )[ R ( t ) − C ( t )] 

 The equilibrium consumption level : 

Renewable resource extraction problems exhibit a tipping point in the level of consumption. Any rate of consumption above the equilibrium extraction rate will produce a collapse, as can be shown in a formal model. We can think of the amount of the resource as a circular field, a pie. Consumption takes a bite out of that pie. Growth regenerates an amount of resource proportional to the amount remaining. For low levels of consumption, the resource will increase in size. But regrowth will not be able to compensate for high levels of consumption. In between lies an equilibrium level of consumption exactly balanced by regrowth. If consumption exceeds the equilibrium level, the model predicts accelerating declines that become steep collapses. The slow decline followed by a steep collapse sends a warning for those who manage resources that are difficult to measure accurately, such as fish stocks. Annual catches give a clue, but they are not exact. We should not be surprised that cod fishing in the North Atlantic produced a modern collapse to rival that suffered by the Vinlanders, as described by Jared Diamond in his book on collapsing societies. Cod had been fished in the North Atlantic for over five hundred years. British explorers who first visited the Canadian coast told tales 

---

of catching cod in baskets and having difficulty rowing through the prodigious shoals of cod. By 1992, Canada had imposed a 

moratorium on cod fishing.^12 Our model of resource extraction assumes a constant growth rate, allowing us to solve for the equilibrium consumption level. In reality, growth rates vary from year to year. In the case of a pasture, growth depends on temperature and rainfall. For a fish population, the growth rate depends on the amount of available food, which in turn depends on variations in weather or on climatic changes. In the other two models, variation would not have long-term consequences. Some years we might have too much of a public good or a little less congestion. Those would affect utility, but perhaps no more than the inevitable variation in the weather. But in renewable resource extraction problems, variation leads to either collapse or abundance, provided that behavior does not change. Figure 23.1 assumes an average regeneration rate of 25% and 100 units of a resource. Given those assumptions, the equilibrium consumption level equals 20 units per year. The figure assumes a variable growth rate randomly drawn between 20% and 30%. The model also builds in a maximal level of the resource set to 150. 

Figure 23.1: Ten Possible Paths Assuming Variation in Growth Rate of Resource In approximately half of the paths, the level of the resource collapses. In the other half, the level of the resource increases to the maximum possible level. The variation does not cancel out. To the contrary, the effect of a reduction or increase in growth accumulates 

---

over time.^13 From this simulation, we see that optimal consumption policy would call for less consumption following lean years to prevent collapse. Given that variation in the growth rates of a renewable resource requires consumption to vary with the resource level, we know that communities that manage a renewable resource must be able to adjust extraction levels. The method or mechanism used to make those adjustments depends on features of the resource. To borrow a phrase, “There are no panaceas.”^14 No single solution will work in all cases. How local populations solve these types of problems depends on characteristics of the resource and the community. Fish differ from cattle. A community managing multiple herds of cattle sharing a commons can monitor the behavior of individuals and the level of the resource (the amount of grass). Overgrazing can be solved by rotation schemes that allocate to each individual set times or zones for grazing. These rotations can adjust grazing based on the height of the grass. But for communities that fish, managing the resource requires more elaborate institutions that can precisely monitor individual behavior. The number of fish in the sea cannot be counted. It can only be estimated based on catches. The resource extraction problem has much more uncertainty than the cattle situation. Managing a common aquatic resource requires conservatism and more monitoring. 

---

### Collective Action Problems: Solved and Unsolved 

In collective action problems, the outcomes that result from selfinterested behavior do not align with the goals of the individuals. As noted, these problems occur in myriad settings. They arise in paying for non-rival and non-excludable goods. They arise in decisions for when to drive on highways. They even arise in how we drive on highways. Drivers on a busy highway who tailgate or talk on their cellphones may not take into account the costs of those actions to all of the cars behind them if an accident occurs. Such problems exist at multiple scales. They arise within family interactions: keeping the house clean, making dinner, going shopping, and saving for vacations can all misalign individual incentives and collective well-being. They exist with communities, regions, and countries in the provision of public goods and the use and management of limited resources. They also exist at a global scale in the form of carbon emissions. Most countries would prefer to produce more energy themselves (which emits more carbon) but have lower global emission levels: individually rational actions do not align with the common good. Collective action problems occur in the natural world as well. Trees in a forest compete for light and water. If a tree species evolves a higher canopy or deeper roots, it will increase its own chances of survival but impose a cost on other species of trees. The trees cannot pass laws to prevent growing too tall or tapping into deeper water. They do not achieve the socially optimal solution.^15 Collective action problems tend to be easier to solve the smaller and more homogeneous the group of individuals or actors involved and the better the information (i.e., actions are easier and the state of the system can be monitored). While families generally solve collective action problems, international organizations find cooperation much harder. Efforts to reduce carbon emissions require coordination among a large group of diverse actors using imprecise monitoring mechanisms. Solving such a problem requires 

---

coordination as well as an enforcement mechanism. History teaches us that overfishing waters or overgrazing meadows invites the risk of collapse. We can apply that same reasoning to the collective action problems we face today. Elinor Ostrom, who spent decades studying real-world efforts to solve collective action problems, found that in addition to monitoring deviations, communities that solve collective action problems agree on clear boundaries, agree on well defined rules, grant the authority to impose graduated sanctions, and 

establish mechanisms to resolve disputes.^16 

---