Rule of 72 The economy consists of workers and capitalists. The wages of workers increase at a rate g , the growth rate in the economy. The capitalists have wealth Wt at time t and earn return r (net of taxes) and consume a constant amount A. The income of capitalists will increase faster than that of workers if and only if 

 Cause of inequality: In a market economy, the rate of return on capital exceeds the overall rate of growth ( r > g ). Capitalists with large accumulations of wealth spend a small proportion of their income from capital on consumption, so their share of total income increases over time. 

To see how the difference in rates produces inequality, we can apply the rule of 72. If initially the incomes of workers equal those of capitalists and wages grow at 2% while capital grows at 6%, then in thirty-six years wages double but income from capital increases 8fold. Within seventy-two years, capitalists earn sixty-four times the income of workers. Piketty applies this model to explain long-term trends in inequality of both income and wealth. The model calibrates remarkably well with three centuries of data from France and England. The model also sheds light on patterns of inequality over the past century in the United States and Europe, in which the two world wars destroyed capital stocks in Europe, evening out the income and capital distributions there. One reason the model fits the data as well as it does is that it omits two effects that cancel out. By excluding entrepreneurs, the model understates inequality. In assuming that all 

---

succeeding generations of capitalists invest wisely—not all do—the model overstates capital accumulations contribution to inequality. The creation of a new class of rich individuals and the loss of an old class of rich individuals need not balance out. A more granular model would include movement in and out of the wealthy class. That caveat aside, the model’s implication is that so long as capital increases, capitalists earn an increasing portion of the economic pie. If we keep applying the rule of 72, we find that the income of the capitalists eventually dwarfs that of the workers. The problem of capital accumulation has a straightforward solution: impose a wealth tax. That may not be politically possible. As an alternative, we might wait for a war or revolution to redistribute wealth by force or for some technological breakthroughs that produces a new set of wealthy capitalists. Our next two models give priority to sociological forces. Both also have strong empirical support. The first explains rising inequality based on _assortative mating_. A family’s income depends on the incomes of both partners. If a low-income person marries a highincome person, then that marriage will contribute toward equalizing income distributions. If high-income people marry other high earners, then income disparities will increase. Most people marry at an age when a potential partner’s lifetime income cannot be known with certainty. People do know the education level and general health of potential partners and get signals of their ambitions. Evidence shows that as men and women become more educated and earn higher incomes—refer back to the technology and human capital model— they choose life partners who also have higher education levels. The increase in inequality results from the following factors. First, women increasingly earn college degrees. Second, relative income increases with education level. Third, educated men and women prefer educated partners. It follows that families with two educated people will be more likely to have two high incomes contributing to household-level income inequality. The logic is airtight. The only 

question concerns the size of the effect.^11 Sociologists calibrate the model by categorizing people into five 

---

education levels: dropout, high school, some college, college degree, and postgraduate. They then calculate the average income for each education level and fit the data for the number of marriages between each pair of education levels, resulting in a crude approximation of the impact of assortative mating. 

---