Any auction in which the bidders have independent private values drawn from a known, common distribution produces the same revenue to the seller and the same expected payoffs to the buyers if each bidder makes a bid that maximizes her expected payoff, the bidder with the highest bid always wins the object, and a bidder who has a value of zero has an expected payoff of zero. 

The revenue equivalence theorem implies that an _all-pay auction_ —in which every bidder, even the losing bidders, pays the amount of her bid—produces the same outcome as the second-price auction.^7 Even a crazy design such as a _third-price auction,_ where the highest bid wins and pays an amount equal to the third-highest bid, produces the same winner and same revenue. The revenue equivalence theorem does not imply that the auction rules do not matter. In an actual auction, bidders may not use optimal strategies, or, in a firstprice auction, bidders may have different beliefs about the value distributions of other bidders. If either condition holds—nonoptimizing bidders or diverse beliefs—then revenue could vary across the types of auctions. Empirical and experimental tests do show some differences in how auctions perform. As would be expected from our discussion of when to expect rationality, the higher the stakes and the more sophisticated the bidders, the more likely it is that people act rationally. In online auctions for consumer goods, we might expect some people to follow rules of thumb or suffer from biases (such as bidding in increments of $10). In a multimillion-dollar oil lease auction, bidders probably have access to full information and the requisite skills. Also, the type of auction could influence the number of bidders. In timber auctions, first-price auctions attract more small bidders than 

---

do ascending-bid auctions because small bidders have some chance of winning if the bigger bidders submit low bids. The small bidders have no chance in an ascending-bid auction, as the bigger firms can 

see the smaller firms’ bids and outbid them.^8 Auctions also differ in the cognitive demands they place on participants. In some auctions, optimal behavior is easy to learn. In an ascending-bid auction, a bidder should remain in the auction until the price reaches her value. Other bidders not following optimal strategies could cause a bidder to have a higher or lower expected payoff, but they do not change the optimal strategy: a bidder should stay in as long as the price is less than her value. Similarly, in a second-price auction, a bidder should always follow the same strategy of bidding her true value. However, figuring out that truthful bidding is optimal requires multiple steps of logic. Recall that dominant strategies are optimal regardless of the strategies of others. Both ascending-bid and second-price auctions have dominant strategies. First-price auctions do not. In a first-price auction, changes in the bidding strategy of one bidder can change the optimal strategy for another bidder. If one bidder always bids either zero or 50, then the other bidder should always bid either 1 or 

51. There would be no reason to bid 60 or 70 as the winner would pay more for the object than necessary. Given the behavior of the other bidder, whenever a bid of 60 wins the auction, so does a bid of 51.     Even if an auction has a dominant strategy, not all dominant strategies are equally easy to deduce. In an ascending-bid auction, the strategy of staying in as long as the price is less than a bidder’s value requires a single step of reasoning: _if the price is less than your value, buy it at this price._ In the second-price auction, a bidder has to think through multiple contingencies to see that truthful revelation is optimal. Of course, once someone bids in several second-price auctions, she should learn that the optimal bid is to tell the truth.     A last feature to consider is whether the auction encourages non- optimal behavior. In first- and second-price auctions, bidders submit 

---

their bids without knowing others’ bids. In an ascending-bid auction, bidders can see the price rise and are aware of who remains in the bidding. This could cause a bidder to attach some value to winning and to overbid. Auctioneers in charity auctions try to raise bids by emotional appeals, perhaps by showing a video of children frolicking on new playground equipment that your bids will support. The success of strategies depends on the sophistication of the bidders. It is difficult to imagine bidders in a timber auction being persuaded to bid more than their forecasted valuations. It is less difficult to imagine a person at a charity auction overbidding in light of the cause. Whether or not bidders change their values during the bidding process is a matter of conjecture. We need only recognize that it _could_ happen. In firstand second-price auctions, bidders make a single bid, which allows no opportunity for emotional appeals during the auction. Finally, in the first-price auction and the ascending-bid auction, the price equals the highest bid. In the second-price auction, it equals the second-highest bid. This leaves the appearance that the seller could have received a higher price and, in part, explains why governments do not use second-price auctions. Imagine the headline if a government received three bids for oil rights, one at $6 million, one at $8 million, and one at $12 million: “Government Gets $12 Million Bid but Sells Land for $8 Million.” Anyone who knows auction theory would know that had the government run a first-price auction or an ascending-bid auction, then the top bid would not have been $12 million. It would have been $8 million. As has been highlighted throughout the book, formal models reveal conditions necessary for a result to hold. The revenue equivalence theorem does not say that all auction mechanisms produce the same outcome. It states that all auctions with optimizing bidders in which the highest bidder wins the object and a bidder with zero value has an expected payoff of zero are equivalent. A seller could raise more money by relaxing one of those three assumptions. A seller would have difficulty making people act against their selfinterest, and she would also probably not be able to extract money from someone who does not value the good. This leaves as the only 

---

possibility not selling the object to the highest bidder. One way to do this is to not sell the good at all. If the seller knows the distribution of values, she could set a _reserve price,_ a minimum bid. Under some conditions, this can increase her expected revenue. Suppose that seller is certain that the three bidders for an object have values of 5, 10, and 60. Using any of the three auctions above, the winner bids $60 and pays $10. The seller could earn higher revenue by imposing a reserve price of $60 and running a first-price auction. 

---

### Mechanisms for Deciding on a Public Project 

We next compare two mechanisms for deciding whether to build a public project such as a school, a new highway, or a sports arena. We assume each person has an individual value from the project and that the project has a collective cost. 

---