Each of N individuals, indexed by i , has a riot threshold , T ( i ) ∈ {0, 1, ··· N }. Initially, any individual with a riot threshold of zero, T ( i ) = 0, joins the riot. R ( t ) equals the number of people rioting at time t. Individual i participates at time t if T ( i ) < R ( t − 1). 

Analysis of the model reveals that the diversity of thresholds matters at least as much as the average threshold. We can see why by comparing three scenarios involving a population of 1,000 people. In the first scenario, everyone has a threshold of 10, so no social movement occurs. In the second scenario, 5 people have a threshold of zero, 10 people have a threshold of 1, and everyone else has a threshold of 20. In this scenario, 5 people join initially. The next day, 10 more join. Thereafter, no one else joins. In the third scenario, each person has a unique threshold ranging from 0 to 999. For convenience, we can number people from 0 to 999 according to their thresholds, where person _i_ has a threshold of _i_. In the first period, person 0 joins. The second day, person 1 joins. On the third day, person 2 joins. Each day one more person joins, until all 1,000 people participate. The first scenario has the lowest average threshold, yet it produces no social movement because no one has a threshold of zero. In the second scenario, some people have thresholds of zero, but not a sufficient number to create a widespread movement. Only in the last scenario does the social movement take hold. The model reveals the importance of the entire distribution of thresholds, not just the mean. It therefore shows the difficulty of predicting which social movements will be successful. The model can also guide action by informing revolutionaries who wish to start an uprising against a despot that in addition to having a core group of people to begin the movement, they also need to create a 

---

population of others who will join them. Variants of the riot model can be applied to standing ovations, to changes in political views (the acceptance of gay rights), to fashion changes (wearing bow ties), and to market dynamics (joining in a stock market or real estate bubble). In each case, people’s behavior may be approximated by a threshold-based rule, and that threshold varies across people. In each of these contexts, the likelihood of a large event—be it a mass movement or a fad of thicker-rimmed eyeglasses—may depend as much or more on the distribution of thresholds than on the mean value. 

---

### Market Creation and Double Riots 

The riot model can be extended to cover internet start-ups that create new markets of buyers and sellers. To create a new market, a start-up must create a population of buyers and a population of sellers. A site that matches dog owners and dog sitters needs to sign up dog sitters as well as dog owners. Similar incentives exist for sites that offer package delivery, transportation, or housecleaning. Each must create two populations to succeed, and the populations must grow at approximately the same rate. Otherwise, either the sellers or the buyers will be unable to find a match and they will leave disappointed. In other words, the start-up must create a simultaneous _double riot_. The successful start-up Airbnb provides a mini case study of a double riot. Airbnb matches people willing to rent a house, room, or apartment with people looking for a place to stay for a short period of time. Airbnb needed to build two populations: renters and people letting out their apartments. People looking for a place to rent would visit the site only if the site had a sufficient number of places available for rent. Therefore, Airbnb needed to sign up people willing to list apartments. The first two launches of Airbnb failed. Listing an apartment on the site required effort—downloading pictures and including other information. No one had an incentive to list until Airbnb had a large population of renters. Thus, Airbnb needed enough listings to create a riot among renters—that is, to get renters to come to the site. They also needed enough renters to create a riot among those who wanted to list rooms and apartments. Whether Airbnb would take off would depend on the thresholds for the two groups. The bigger problem was getting people to list, as that required more effort. Airbnb overcame this problem by going door-to-door and helping people list their apartments. Once that happened, the renting riot began and the listing riot followed.^2 The business succeeded because the founders were able to bootstrap a sufficient number of initial renters so that a 

---

double riot ensued. They constructed the tail, and the tail wagged the dog. 

---

### Two Models of Segregation 

Our next two models, both developed by Thomas Schelling, explore segregation. People segregate by race and ethnicity at multiple scales. We segregate by nation and by regions within nations. The United States is racially segregated by neighborhoods within cities, and even by tables within school cafeterias. These observations can be read as evidence of intolerance. That inference contradicts the increasing number of interracial and interethnic marriages. How can the same people choose not to live near or even eat lunch with others of different races, yet they choose to marry across racial groups? We could account for these facts if the people in multiracial marriages belong to different social classes than those who sit at segregated tables. But that is not true. Interracial marriage occurs at all income levels, and segregated lunch tables can be found even at the most elite colleges and universities. Schelling’s models can accommodate both sets of facts. They show how tolerant people can produce segregation. The first of these models, _Schelling’s party model,_ can be thought of as a mashup of the random walk model and the riot model. The model describes a party that takes place in a house with two rooms. The hosts of the party have invited guests that visibly sort into two types. The types could be men and women, blacks and whites, Spaniards and Australians, or goths and jocks. The key assumption is that each person be able to distinguish everyone else’s type. 

---