If a variable grows by a percentage R (less than 15%) each period, then the following provides a good approximation: 

 Periods to Double ≈ 

The rule of 72 quantifies the cumulative effect of higher growth rates. In 1966, Zimbabwe had a per capita GDP of $2,000, twice that of Botswana. Over the next thirty-six years, Zimbabwe experienced little growth. Botswana, meanwhile, averaged 6% growth, meaning that Botswana’s GDP doubled every twelve years. In thirty-six years, it doubled three times, an 8-fold increase. Thus, in 2004, Botswana’s per capita GDP of $8,000 was four times that of Zimbabwe. This same formula reveals why housing bubbles must end and technological progress need not. In 2002, home prices in the United States rose by 10%. That would imply a doubling every seven years. Had that trend continued for thirty-five more years, prices would have doubled five times—a 32-fold increase. A house costing $200,000 in 2002 would cost $6.4 million in 2037. Prices cannot rise at that rate. The bubble had to burst. In contrast, _Moore’s law_ states that the number of transistors that can fit on an integrated circuit doubles every two years. Moore’s law has persisted because spending on research and development has generated a near constant rate of improvement. Demographers apply the exponential growth model to human populations. A population that grows at 6% a year doubles in size in twelve years. In thirty-six years, it doubles three times, and in one hundred years, it doubles eight times (increasing 256-fold). In 1798 British economist Thomas Malthus noticed that the population was growing exponentially and wrote a model showing that if the economy’s ability to produce food only increased linearly, then a 

---

crisis loomed. The short version goes as follows: Population was growing like 1, 2, 4, 8, 16, 32,.... Food production was growing like 1, 2, 3, 4, 5,.... Malthus foresaw disaster. Fortunately, birth rates fell, and the arrival of the Industrial Revolution increased productivity. Had nothing changed, Malthus would have been correct. But he ignored the potential for innovation—the focus of models later in this chapter. Innovation subverted the trend. The exponential growth model can be applied to the growth of species as well, and not just to rabbits. When you acquire a bacterial infection, tiny bacteria reproduce at incredible rates. Bacteria in human sinuses grow at around 4% a minute. By applying the rule of 72, we can calculate they double every twenty minutes. In a single 

day, each initial bacterial cell spawns over a billion offspring.^2 Their growth stops when the physical constraint of your sinuses leaves them no room. Food constraints, predators, and lack of space all reduce growth. Some species, such as deer in suburban America or the hippos brought to Colombia by drug lord Pablo Escobar, encounter few constraints on growth and their population grows rapidly, though not at bacterial rates.^3 A convex function with a positive slope increases at an increasing value. A convex function with a negative slope becomes less steep. A convex function with an initially large negative slope will flatten. That is true for the equation in the _half-life model,_ which captures decomposition, depreciation, and forgetting. In the model, every _H_ periods half of the quantity decays. Hence, _H_ is known as the _half-life_ for that process. For some physical processes, the half-life is constant. All organic matter contains two forms of carbon: an unstable isotope, carbon-14, and a stable isotope, carbon-12. In living organic matter, these isotopes are present in a constant ratio. When an organism dies, the carbon-14 in its body starts to decompose with a half-life of 5,734 years. The amount of carbon-12, on the other hand, does not change. Willard Libby, a physical chemist, realized that by measuring the ratio of carbon-14 to carbon-12, one can estimate the age of a fossil or artifact, a technique known as radiocarbon dating. Paleontologists 

---

apply radiocarbon dating to the remains of dinosaurs, woolly mammoths, and prehistoric fish. Archeologists use it to adjudicate claims of authenticity. The remains of Ötzi the Iceman, discovered in the Italian Alps, were estimated to be five thousand years old. The Shroud of Turin, first displayed in 1357 and claimed to be Christ’s burial shroud, was found to date from the fourteenth century and not the time of Christ. 

---