We can apply our knowledge of distributions within a class of search models to explain why the number of opportunities a person receives may correlate strongly with success. We embed one class of models, our distribution models, within a second class, search models. When we search, whether for a new pair of shoes, a career, or a vacation spot, we do not know our choice’s value until we try it, though we may know something about the distribution of values, such as the mean, standard deviation, and whether the distribution is normal or has a long tail. Here, we model choice of profession as a search process. Given a profession, a person tries a career path, which we model as a draw from a distribution. We assume that she can either stick with that career or try again. Trying again corresponds to another draw from the distribution. Consider, for example, the choice of profession for a talented young scientist. She could go to medical school or do research in quantum computing. Medical school offers the safer path. Choosing to work on quantum computing involves becoming an entrepreneur and taking on more risk. To account for these differences, we represent the salary distribution for doctors as a normal distribution with mean $250,000 and a standard deviation of $25,000, and the salary distribution for the entrepreneurial career as a power law with an exponent of 3 

with an expected salary of $200,000.^22 Within each profession, our scientist can try multiple careers. She can search. A doctor can switch from oncology to radiology. A failed entrepreneur can pick up the pieces from her start-up and try anew. Each career switch entails a cost. For a doctor, it means more training. For an entrepreneur in quantum computing, it means more long nights of work with little to no 

---

compensation. We assume that our young scientist finds the two professions equally stimulating and makes her choice based on salary. Our model reveals that the better choice depends on how many times she can afford to try new careers. If she must stick with her first career choice, becoming a doctor offers the higher expected salary. If she has sufficient resources to continue trying to be an entrepreneur, eventually she will get a high-paying draw from the long tail. The figure below shows the average largest salary across twenty trials assuming one, two, five, and ten career searches within each profession. If she has the opportunity to try her hand at quantum computing start-ups ten times, her salary will be nearly double what she would earn had she chosen medical school and experimented with ten careers. 

Average Income as a Function of Number of Opportunities If wealth and family support correlate with the number of opportunities a person has to try new careers, our model predicts that wealthier people will choose riskier professions.^23 Evidence on patents aligns with the model. The probability that someone writes a patent correlates with that person’s mathematical abilities. People in the top 1% of math ability are far more likely to hold a patent. Among the top 1%, those from families in the top 10% of the income distribution are even more 

likely to hold a patent.^24 At least two models could explain the disparity. One model could assume that poorer talented students never attend college. They may be working routine jobs and never have the choice between medical school or quantum computing. Or, perhaps poorer students choose safer 

---

careers. The logic that an increase in opportunities creates an incentive for risk applies widely. Venture capitalists take risks because they make multiple investments. An early investment in a single unicorn, a billion-dollar company, more than compensates for many losers. Pharmaceutical research laboratories also take risks, spending billions on drug research. We can apply the same logic when deciding where to eat lunch. When driving cross-country and stopping in an unfamiliar town, we may want to eat at a chain restaurant. If moving to that town, we should experiment. 

---