A population of size N consists of S strong types and W weak types with per-unit costs of signaling c and C > c , respectively. The individuals who send the largest signal split a benefit B. Any signal of magnitude separates the strong types. If CW ≥ cN , then all of the strong types separate. If not, a partial pooling equilibrium exists in which a portion of the strong types signal.^2 

This model can explain why expensive watches and jewelry function as signals of wealth. A person’s house or car also signals her wealth, but people cannot carry their houses and cars around with them at all times. Clothes can signal wealth as well, but may not be able to create separation. For a few hundred dollars, a person could dress like someone of significant wealth. Watches and jewelry, because of their high costs, are more effective as signals. A poor or middle-class person could not afford a $10,000 watch. By wearing one a person proves she has wealth. The benefit she derives may be that people treat her with more respect—assuming that people see wealth as correlating in some way with importance (an inference we might question). 

---

### The Uses and Value of Signals 

We signal in an attempt to reveal hidden attributes to others. We take actions to signal our fitness, wealth, intelligence, and generosity. Sometimes our actions produce signals as by-products. A person who competes in marathons for the pure joy of running signals fitness and dedication even if that was not her intent. The signaling model provides an alternative lens for interpreting a large number of actions. Did a person choose to attend an event, master a skill, or purchase an item out of personal interest, or to signal a type? We might not be able to distinguish between the two cases. Signaling models also provide alternative explanations for empirical regularities—even for the value of earning a college diploma. Data on incomes show that college graduates earn significantly higher salaries. We could infer that the higher wages result from skills and knowledge acquired at college. That data also show that math and science majors earn even higher salaries. From that we could infer that the skills learned in those majors have greater economic value. However, if we look at the tasks that math majors perform, we may find that few use calculus. Moreover, almost no one interviewing for a job is ever asked the derivative of the cosine function or to explain Boyle’s law. In light of that, we might infer that college degrees in general and science and math degrees in particular represent signals of a person’s ability to acquire knowledge. The higher pay that graduates receive stems entirely from the signaling value of degrees rather than what the graduates have learned.^3 Consider the signaling required to become a doctor. Students must pass classes in physics, organic chemistry, and calculus. But do doctors use any calculus? Has your doctor ever looked in your ears and nose and then scratched a calculus equation on her notepad? Of course not. Knowledge of calculus, for the most part, may not be relevant to being a doctor, but it may be a good signal of the ability to master a corpus of knowledge. If so, passing calculus 

---

becomes a useful signal even though the subject material has little direct relevance. When constructing institutions or rules in which people send signals, we would prefer the actions that produce signals build useful skills. To be a successful doctor, a person must be able to memorize facts. To signal the ability to memorize, one could require that applicants memorize the capitals and currencies of every country. Success would signal a candidate’s ability to memorize but would be functionally useless. When rushed to the emergency room with a strange feeling in your stomach, you would not care if your doctor knew that Bratislava is the capital of Slovakia, but you would want your doctor to know the various parts of the digestive system. For this reason, medical boards require that doctors pass exams on anatomy. Passing anatomy signals the ability to memorize. More important, knowing the parts of the body is useful for those who do pass. Thus, passing the anatomy exam provides a _functional signal_. 

---

### Summary 

The signaling model can be applied widely. As already noted, the peacock’s feathers signal robust health. Otherwise, the decorative fans of feathers have little functional value. They may, in fact, be worse then useless. Far better that the peacocks had chosen to develop stronger talons. Strong talons would be more difficult for peahens to notice from afar, so tail feathers won out evolutionarily.^4 The colorful rear ends of male fruit flies serve a similar function as the peacock’s feathers, as does the chirping of grasshoppers and birds. Chirping takes energy. Only a well-fed grasshopper can devote time to chirping rather than chasing down food. Hence, chirping functions as a signal. Human societies engage in a variety of actions to signal their fitness. Anthropologists differentiate between three forms of costly signals: _unconditional generosity, wasteful subsistence behavior,_ and 

_craft traditions_.^5 The potlatch, a ritual carried out by the indigenous people of the Pacific Northwest, may be the most salient example of signaling generosity. To celebrate an event, say a birth or death, a chieftain would give away (or destroy) great amounts of wealth and would challenge other chiefs to match those amounts. Failure to match was a loss of prestige. Giving away wealth can be seen as socially good, but burning it is wasteful. Wasteful subsistence behavior occurs whenever people, typically men, choose to engage in hunting behaviors with lower expected payoffs than harvesting seeds or berries. The men do so because they earn extra respect. The successful hunter signals his strength and bravery, which could be useful in other settings. The successful berry picker signals good eyesight and patience—useful traits, to be sure, but not as predictive of certain types of fitness as turtle-hunting skill. A study of the Meriam, who live on a group of islands of northern Australia, found that male turtle hunters had more than twice as many surviving offspring at age fifty as non-turtle-hunters.^6 Relatedly, many craft traditions involve commitments that require 

---

sufficient time and resources. These activities can result in useful objects—blankets, for example. Craft traditions also involve the making of ceremonial objects that have little practical value. Some anthropologists interpret their creation as signaling. The meaning that accrues to such objects—they can be endowed with substantial cultural significance—need not depend on their functionality. Some advertising also can be interpreted as costly signaling. By purchasing an expensive Super Bowl commercial, a company signals legitimacy. It implies that it believes consumers will like its product enough for the company to earn back the cost of the advertisement in profits. For example, imagine that two manufacturers each introduce a new coffeemaker. One of the manufacturers knows it has a superior product. The other knows that despite the best efforts of its engineers, its product is likely to break down and leave customers less than satisfied. This second manufacturer expects to have 20% of its products returned. Millions of people may buy a coffeemaker during a given year. Without advertising, the two firms might well split the market. Suppose that the manufacturer of the better product spends $2 million on an advertisement to signal the quality of its product. The manufacturer anticipates that early purchasers will buy the product and, in the long run, that this will lead to more sales. The manufacturer may well have a version of the Polya Process model in her head. In contrast, the manufacturer of a lousy product would not take out such an advertisement because its product has little chance of large sales. Spending money to signal product quality is sometimes referred to as _burning money_. Burning money attracts buyers much as the peacock’s feathers attract mates. In all of these cases, signaling involves a cost. Those who send the signal find that the benefits of identifying their greater wealth, ability, or even generosity are reduced by the cost of the signal. In addition, the time and effort spent signaling can be thought of as opportunity costs: resources could have been used in some other way, perhaps creating greater social surplus. For example, a teenager may spend hours deciding which clothes to wear so as to signal his social awareness or devote time to nonproductive activities 

---

that he believes will improve his chances of acceptance at an elite college. To make signaling less socially costly, we try to make signals as functional as possible. Better to have young people signal their physical fitness and bravery by playing team sports, where they learn rules of sportsmanship and collective interests, than to have them risk death jumping motorcycles. As previously noted, better to require doctors to memorize human anatomy than a random collection of J. R. R. Tolkien’s Elvish languages. Nevertheless, try as we might, wasteful signaling will persist. Our challenge is to use models—in particular, the tools of mechanism design—to construct institutions and protocols so that the signals people send are as functional as possible. 

---