Given a cooperative game { N , V }, the Shapley value is defined as follows: let O represent all N! orderings in which the N players could arrive and be added to a group. For each ordering in O , define the added value of player i to be the change in the value function that occurs when player i is added. Player i ’s Shapley value equals the average of her added values over all orderings in O. 

Now that we have the idea, we construct a more complicated example. Imagine a crew team that requires four rowers and a coxswain—a smaller person who manages the stroke rate and steers. Our crew team (the players in the cooperative game) consists of six individuals: five tall, powerful rowers and a smaller person who has been trained as a coxswain. To enter a race, the team needs four rowers and a coxswain. A team of five that includes the smaller, trained coxswain will be competitive and has value 10. A team of five rowers without the coxswain could enter a race, but would perform poorly because of the extra weight. We assign that team of five a value of 2. To compute Shapley values, we imagine the players arriving in every possible order. If the smaller coxswain arrives first, second, third, or fourth, she adds no value. If she arrives fifth, which occurs one-sixth of the time, she adds value 10. If she arrives sixth, she replaces one of the rowers as coxswain and her added value equals 

8. Averaging across all of these possibilities, we find the coxswain’s Shapley value equals 3.     Each rower adds value if and only if she arrives fifth, which occurs one-sixth of the time. If the coxswain has not arrived, the rower who arrives fifth adds value 2. If the coxswain has arrived, the rower adds value 10. Given the one-in-five chance the coxswain is last among 

---

the five other players, and the four-in-five chance the coxswain arrives among the first four, we arrive at a Shapley value of for 

each rower.^1 Intuitively, the coxswain’s value should be more than the value of a single rower and, given that the rowers can compete, albeit poorly, without the coxswain, less than the combined value of all of the rowers. There are an infinite number of ways to assign values that satisfy those constraints. Shapley values assign specific values: 3 for the coxswain and 7 total for the five rowers. 

---

### Axiomatic Basis for the Shapley Value 

We now describe a set of axioms that Shapley values uniquely satisfy. That result explains why we might privilege Shapley values over other possible measures. First, note that we calculate Shapley values by averaging a player’s marginal contribution across all possible orderings, so any player who never adds value has a Shapley value of zero. Moreover, any two identical players—that is, two players who, for each coalition, contribute the same amount— must be assigned the same Shapley value. And given that the sum of the added values equals the total value of the game for any ordering, Shapley values must also sum to the value of the game. These will be three of the four axioms. Notice that LOTB values satisfy the first two axioms but not the third. To these three properties, we add a fourth, _additivity,_ which requires that if the value function of a cooperative game can be decomposed into two value functions, each assigned to a different cooperative game, a person’s value in the combined game should equal the sum of her values in the two constituent games. A moment’s reflection reveals that Shapley value satisfies this property as well. That those four properties uniquely characterize the Shapley value is less obvious. Showing that a measure uniquely satisfies a set of axioms places the measure on logical foundations. Without the axioms, a measure may be intuitive but could be seen as arbitrary, as one of several plausible measures. The theorem also tells us that if we choose any other measure, we must abandon one of the axioms. This does not mean that Shapley value is the only reasonable measure. Lloyd Shapley, an economist and mathematician, may have first written down the measure and only after the fact constructed axioms that it uniquely satisfies. Which came first is of little relevance. Even if the axioms had been backward-engineered, if we accept the axioms, we should embrace the measure. The appropriateness of the measure hinges on the reasonableness of the axioms. In this case, the first 

---

three are difficult to dispute. The fourth, additivity, though more complicated than the others, can be supported on the grounds that if it did not hold, players would have incentives to split up or form coalitions. 

---