Changes in a policy or the environment likely produce behavioral responses by those affected. Models estimated with data on past human behaviors will therefore not be accurate. Models must take into account the fact that people respond to policy and environmental changes. 

As should be clear at this point, there exists no best solution for how to model people. How rational we make them or how adaptive we make their rules depends on the circumstances. We should exercise our best judgment in each situation. Given the uncertainties, we should err on the side of more models rather than fewer. Even if we are predisposed to dismiss rational-choice models as unrealistic, we must recognize their tractability, their capacity to reveal the directional forces of incentives, and their value as a benchmark. Simple rule-based behaviors, such as zero intelligence, are also unrealistic. Though wrong, they can be of use. They are easy to analyze and can reveal how much intelligence matters in a given setting. Human behavior occurs within the extremes of zero intelligence and full rationality, so it makes sense to construct models in which individuals adapt using rules. Those rules should take into account the fact that people vary in their cognitive attachment and capabilities within a domain. We should therefore expect behavioral diversity. We might also expect some consistency within groups. This 

too can be included in models.^24 In sum, given the complexities involved in modeling humans, we have abundant reasons to apply multiple diverse models. We may not be able to predict exactly what people will do, but we may be able to identify the set of possibilities. If we can, we have benefited 

---

from constructing models because we know what could happen. We conclude with a plea for humility and empathy. In constructing models of people, a modeler must be humble. Given the challenges of diversity, social influence, cognitive errors, purpose, and adaptation, our models will inevitably be wrong, which is why we take a many-model approach. Austere models of behavior fit some situations well and allow us to focus on other aspects of the environment. Richer behavioral models will be more appropriate when we have better data. We must maintain modest expectations. People are diverse, purposive, adaptive, biased, and socially influenced, and we possess a degree of agency. How can we not expect any single model of human behavior to be wrong? It must be. Our aim is to construct many models that as an ensemble will be useful. 

---