An urn contains one white ball and one gray ball. Each period a ball is drawn randomly and returned to the urn along with an additional ball of the color opposite to the color drawn. The color of the ball denotes the outcome. 

The balancing process captures sequences of decisions or actions that include pressures toward equal allocation. Parents with two children may try to give equal time to each. Spending an afternoon with one child creates a desire to spend more time with the other child. The balancing process could even model organizational efforts to achieve equity. The International Olympic Committee (IOC) would like every region of the world to host games. In 2013, the IOC announced that Tokyo had been selected as the host city for the 2020 Summer Olympic and Paralympic Games. Two European cities, Istanbul and Madrid, lost. Four years later, the IOC awarded Paris the 2024 games and a North American city, Los Angeles, the 2028 games. Tokyo won the 2020 games in part on the strength of its proposal and in part because the Summer Games had not been held in Japan since 1964. Geographic fairness appears to exert sway. Europe, Asia and Oceania, and the Americas have hosted the games approximately equal numbers of times in the period following World War II. Europe has been awarded the games eight times, the Americas six times, and Asia and Oceania seven times. 

---

### Path Dependence or Tipping Point 

Path dependence, a gradual effect on outcomes, differs from a tipping point, an abrupt change in outcomes. The growth of Microsoft provides a good example of path dependence. Founded in 1975, Microsoft developed interpreters for the BASIC computer language. In 1979, Microsoft inked a deal with International Business Machines (IBM) to provide the operating system for IBM’s personal computer. This deal set Microsoft on a path that transformed a company with forty employees into one of the most valuable companies in the world. The IBM contract contributed to Microsoft’s upward path but did not guarantee long-term success. At the time, the personal computer market was small. The internet did not exist, nor did sophisticated word processing, business software, or video games. Moreover, the success of the personal computer depended in part on the DOS operating system that Microsoft developed. As the personal computer market grew, other companies developed software compatible with DOS, providing more positive feedbacks. These events—the success of DOS, the growth of the personal computer market, and the development of software running on the DOS platform—can be thought of as one color of ball being consistently drawn from the urn. Each outcome made the next more likely. The computer age may have been inevitable, but Microsoft’s central role and the growth of the personal computer represent one of many potential paths. We can contrast the path dependence of Microsoft’s growth with the assassination of Archduke Franz Ferdinand on June 28, 1914, which many see as a tipping point that led to World War I. Six years prior to the assassination, Austria-Hungary had annexed Bosnia and Herzegovina. Among the Serbians unhappy with that development was Gavrilo Princip, who shot and killed Franz Ferdinand and his wife, Sophie. Austria-Hungary blamed Serbia, a near-inevitable reaction, and then turned to Germany’s Kaiser Wilhelm for 

---

assurance as they prepared for war against Serbia. Tensions escalated. Serbia had an alliance with Russia, which in turn had alliances with France and the United Kingdom. By August 2, Germany had declared war on France. On August 3, Belgium refused to grant Germany free passage into France, and full-scale war began. This vastly simplified version of events suggests that given the alliances, the killing of the archduke tipped the world toward war. We can measure path dependence and tipping points through 

changes in the probabilities of the possible outcomes.^7 For the Polya process, the initial probability distribution is uniform over all distributions in the urn. This is the maximum entropy distribution. As events unfold, the distribution slowly narrows, indicative of path dependence: what might happen changes as outcomes occur. The reduction in entropy is gradual. At a tipping point, the probability distribution changes abruptly. Entropy may fall quickly. Figure 14.2 demonstrates the difference in two processes, each with two possible outcomes. After an event occurs—the contract for Microsoft or the killing of the archduke—the probabilities of each change. Subsequent events also change the probabilities. The process with the tipping point has a sharp kink. The path-dependent process changes slowly. 

 Figure 14.2: A Tipping Point vs. Path Dependence 

---

### Further Applications 

In real situations, path dependence may not be as extreme as in the Polya process. Nevertheless, we can infer from the model that when behavior has a large social component, almost anything can happen. On one college campus, most students may wear black winter parkas; on another, they may wear blue peacoats. Model thinking suggests that differences could be the result of social influence as much as distinct underlying preferences. That holds in any context where people choose among a fixed set of options and their choices depend on the choices made earlier by others. Examples include democratic elections, which movie to see, and which technology to purchase. The model can be extended to allow social influence to vary by the alternative chosen. Vanilla ice cream may have a constant level of feedback. The more exotic green tea ice cream may generate more variation in feedback: a friend may not like it and discourage you from trying it, or a friend may love it and encourage you to order it. It can be shown that less variation in feedbacks increases the likelihood of choosing an outcome.^8 The model can also be changed so that people differ in their susceptibility to social influence; some people give more or less weight to the balls added to the run. In any variation of the model, we can measure (or estimate) the extent of path dependence and compare it to other versions. If the assumptions we make in constructing a model of new product introductions shows that outcomes depend on the early part of the path, then entering, intervening, or subsidizing early may be a good strategy. The model provides a logic for companies to rush their products to market or offer steep discounts to generate early adopters. Other assumptions may show that having the better product may matter more than entering early and that the better strategy is to focus on quality. By using models, we can identify the features relevant to a particular situation—the relative importance of individual preferences and social effects, the variation in feedbacks, 

---

and the relative differences in quality—and deploy that knowledge to inform strategy and guide data collection. On a final note, the Polya process shows how positive feedbacks can produce path-dependent outcomes and equilibria. Path dependence arises in a far broader set of contexts. Some degree of path dependence (in outcomes if not equilibria) occurs whenever one action bumps into or interacts with future actions. That is true 

when making decisions on large public projects.^9 The decision to build a park or a highway constrains future planning decisions. The extent of that path dependence generally will depend on the size of the project. Central Park has had a profound impact on how New York City has developed. While the Polya process reveals the core idea that interactions produce path dependence, we need more realistic models for that insight to guide action. 

---

---