If any two nodes in a network differ in their degree, on average a node has lower degree than its neighbors. In other words, on average, people’s friends are more popular than they are.^8 

The logic of the friendship paradox extends to any attribute that correlates with the number of friends. If active, happy, intelligent, wealthy, and kind people have, on average, more friends, then a person’s friends will be, on average, more active, happier, more intelligent, wealthier, and more beautiful.^9 Imagine a network in which 90% of unhappy people have four friends and 10% have ten friends. Reverse the proportions for happy people: 10% have four friends and 90% have ten friends. People’s friends will disproportionately consist of people with ten friends. A large majority of those people will be happy, so most people’s friends will be happier than they are. We now show the _Six Degrees of Separation_ phenomenon, the claim that any two people on the earth can be connected through six friends or fewer. While the friendship paradox holds for any network, six degrees of separation only holds for some types of networks. The phenomenon’s name derives from an experiment carried out by Stanley Milgram in the 1960s. Milgram sent packets to 296 individuals in Omaha, Nebraska, and Wichita, Kansas, that were to be forwarded to an individual in Boston, Massachusetts. The recipients had to follow the same rules. These participants were only allowed to send the packets via mail to people that they knew personally and whom they believed might have a greater chance of knowing the target person in Boston, with instructions to do the same. Individuals signed a roster to record the path and mailed postcards to the researchers so the researchers could track breaks in the chain. Sixty-four of the letters arrived in Boston. Of those that 

---

did, the average path length was slightly less than six, hence the phrase “six degrees of separation.” A second experiment run fifty years later on a much grander scale using email created eighteen global targets and sent them to more than 20,000 people. The median path length of email chains was between five and seven, depending on the geographic distance between the source and the target. The length of paths found does not equal the minimal path length between participants. The evidence therefore suggests that most people are linked by fewer 

than six degrees.^10 We construct a simplified version of the small-world network to give intuition about the six degrees of separation phenomenon. Our version assumes that individuals have a small cluster of _clique friends,_ who all know one another, and that they also have friends outside of those cliques, whom we call _random friends_.^11 Figure 10.3 shows an individual (denoted by the black circle) with five clique friends and two random friends. It also shows a selection of friends of the node’s friends (light gray circles). 

Figure 10.3: A Node’s Clique Friends ( _C_ ) and Random Friends ( _R_ ) These random friends might also be thought of as _weak ties_ — people who connect you to other communities of people. Our weak ties, the random friends in our network, play an important informational role by connecting communities with diverse interests and information. Hence, sociologists speak of the _strength of weak_ 

_ties_.^12 This construction allows us to calculate the number of neighbors of degree two (the friends of friends), by adding up all of the friends 

---

of random friends but only adding the random friends of the clique friends. We do not count the clique friends of the clique friends, as they are members of the node’s clique. We calculate the number of _friends of friends of friends_ similarly. We add in all of the clique friends’ random friends’ friends, but we do not add in a random friend’s clique friends’ clique friends, as they have already been counted as neighbors of degree two. To produce the six degrees of separation phenomenon, we apply the same logic to a network with 100 clique friends and 20 random friends. 

---