Individual i submits a valuation for a project of cost C. If the sum of the individual valuations exceeds the cost, then the project is undertaken. 

 Individual i pays no tax if and otherwise. The mechanism is incentive compatible ( ), efficient, and individually rational. It also implements the efficient outcome in dominant strategies. As the following example shows, this mechanism can violate budget balance : 

 Example : ( V 1 , V 2 , V 3 ) = (60, 120, 150) and C = 300. The project should be undertaken given that 300 < 60 + 120 + 

150. Individual 1 pays taxes of 30, the cost minus the sum of the other valuations (300 − 270); individual 2 pays taxes of 90; and individual 3 pays taxes of 120. The total taxes generated the sum of 240, less than the cost of the project. 

This mechanism satisfies incentive compatibility by a logic similar to that of a second-price auction. Suppose that the project has a cost of $300 and that an individual values the project at $80. There are three cases to consider. If the other valuations sum to less than $220, the individual has no incentive to submit a value more than $80, as he would have to pay that amount. If, at the other extreme, the sum of the others’ valuations exceeds $300, then he pays nothing, and he could submit any valuation. If, though, the sum of the valuations of the others lies between $220 and $300, then if the individual submits a valuation of $80, he will pay $300 minus that sum and the project will be undertaken (the efficient outcome). He would not want to submit a valuation of, say, $70 because the sum of 

---

the other values could be $225 and his low valuation would prevent the project from being undertaken. Had he submitted a valuation of $80, it would have been undertaken at a cost to him of only $75. Given that the pivot mechanism satisfies incentive compatibility, it follows that it also satisfies efficiency. The project is undertaken only if the sum of the valuations exceeds the cost. Note that because reporting one’s true value is a dominant strategy, the efficient outcome is also dominant-strategy implementable. Also, because each individual pays at most her value for the project, the mechanism satisfies voluntary participation. However, as shown in the box below, the mechanism need not produce a balanced budget. In fact, only in rare cases will it do so. For the problem of deciding on a public project, no mechanism will satisfy every criterion we might desire. The fact that we can use models to prove that can save us a lot of time trying to do the impossible. Just as engineers do not waste time trying to build perpetual motion machines, mechanism designers do not seek incentive-compatible, individually rational, efficient, budget-balanced mechanisms for the public project problem. No such mechanism exists. The pivot mechanism is about as good as we have, but it fails to satisfy budget balance. That problem cannot be fixed by raising the amount of taxes that people pay for the project, as that would make the mechanism no longer either incentive compatible or individually rational. Individuals would have an incentive to lie, and some might be asked to contribute more than their value for the project. One possible workaround is to raise taxes in some other way and to have a pool of money available for projects. That would itself create incentive issues, though not as directly. A better solution is to have some other source of money. For example, a university that both has a large central endowment and consists of colleges that have separate endowments could use this mechanism to decide whether to construct a new student union. Each college dean would have an incentive to truthfully reveal her value for the union and the university chancellor could make up for any shortfall. A business composed of subunits that have budget authority could do the same. A project to 

---

switch to a cloud-based system could be decided upon with the pivot mechanism, and any shortcoming could be covered by upper management. 

---

### Summary 

The mechanism design framework enables us to compare mechanisms across a variety of criteria. Does a mechanism produce efficient outcomes? Do people tell the truth? Would people voluntarily participate? Does the mechanism produce a surplus or loss? Using the mechanism design framework, we can also derive what is possible. It may not be possible to satisfy all of the desired criteria within the same mechanism. In these cases, modelers become engineers. We use models to try to construct workable solutions. As technology changes, so too can our mechanisms. Take, for example, the auctions used by internet search sites such as Google. Originally, Google charged a fixed price per thousand clicks. That mechanism was not optimal given changes in information technology that allowed Google to run millions of auctions simultaneously. By using auctions, Google increased its revenue, and it allocated ad space more efficiently. Google now uses a generalized second-price auction. Each bidder submits a per-click bid to advertise for a keyword—say _mesothelioma_ , a cancer caused by exposure to asbestos. The highest bidder receives the first ad slot, the secondhighest bidder receives the second slot, and the third-highest bidder receives the third slot. The prices they pay are determined as in the second-price auction. Suppose that the top four bids are $10, $7, $6, and $3 per click. The third-highest bidder will pay a price equal to the bid of the fourthhighest bidder, $3. The second-highest bidder will pay a price equal to the bid of the third-highest bidder, $6. And the highest bidder will pay $7.^9 After learning the valuations of advertisers, Google could have set a reserve price and raised even more money. But that outcome would not necessarily hold if the bidders knew this was Google’s plan. A bidder who thinks he is likely to be the high bidder would not want Google to know his valuation. Placing reserve prices would also harm Google’s reputation. A reserve price would be seen 

---

as non-cooperative behavior because Google cannot claim to have a reserve value for spots on a webpage. The top advertising slot on a keyword search has little value to Google unless it is sold. That is not true for someone selling a collection of vintage albums or a used car. Those items have values to their sellers, so a reserve price is justified. However, Google values its reputation, and setting a reserve price to extract more revenue might anger advertisers. To summarize, mechanism design models can aid in the design of and choice among institutions. With them, we can deduce what is possible and not possible to implement. It may not be possible to construct a mechanism that produces efficient outcomes, induces people to tell the truth, and results in a balanced budget. If so, we should not waste time and effort trying to design the impossible. Better that we devote our energies to thinking through how best to trade off efficiency, truthful revelation, and a balanced budget We can also use mechanism design to explore bigger questions, such as when we should use a market, when we should vote, when we should rely on a hierarchical mechanism, and when we should turn to a voluntary collective to allocate a resource or decide on an 

action.^10 Each of these four institutions—markets, democracies, hierarchies, and collectives—functions well in some settings and not so well in others. For example, we would not want to vote on what goods people buy, nor would we want to use a market to decide on our political leaders. Within society writ large as well as within an organization, we see each of these institutional forms. A university confronts a market for professors, relies on a democracy to hire faculty, assigns course assignments through a hierarchy, and develops strategic plans using collectives. Nonprofits, for-profits, and government agencies are also a mashup of these various institutional forms. Using the tools of mechanism design, we can formally compare how each of these institutions functions, and in doing so, make better assignments of institutions to tasks. 

---