Each cell on a dimensional square grid is either alive (on) or dead (off). Each cell’s neighbors consist of the eight adjacent cells on the grid. Cells update their states synchronously using two rules: 

 Life rule : A dead cell with exactly three live neighbors becomes alive. 

 Death rule : A live cell with fewer than two or more than three live neighbors dies. 

Start with three live cells in a horizontal row, as shown in figure 15.3. In the next period, we get a vertical row of three cells as seen by applying the rules for life and death to each cell. The live cell in the middle has two live neighbors, so it remains alive. The two live cells at the ends each have one live neighbor, so they die. Finally, the cells above and below the live cell in the center both come to life because each has three live neighbors. By symmetry, another update returns to the horizontal row of three cells. If we continue to iterate the rules, the pattern alternates between a horizontal and vertical line—that is, it blinks. 

Figure 15.3: A Blinker in the Game of Life The blinker results from the interactions of cells. It is not assumed. Complex systems scholars refer to this sort of macro-level phenomenon as _emergent_. Blinkers are among the more common and least impressive of the emergent structures produced by the 

---

Game of Life. Figure 15.4 shows three other simple configurations: a _block,_ a _glider,_ and the _R-pentomino_. The block is an equilibrium configuration. Each live cell has exactly three live neighbors, and each dead cell has at most two live neighbors. No live cells die, and no dead cells come to life. The middle configuration produces a cycle of size 4 that glides diagonally one cell down and to the right. More elaborate configurations, called _glider guns,_ produce an endless stream of gliders. The third configuration, the R-pentomino, creates a complex sequence of patterns. If we run the model for more than a thousand steps on a large grid, it generates gliders and blinkers as well as several small, stable configurations. The Game of 

Life can also produce randomness.^9 Thus, the Game of Life can produce any class of outcome depending on the initial state. These capabilities raise philosophical questions. The Game of Life consists of two-state cells arranged on a grid that update using simple rules. It can produce elaborate patterns and, with appropriate coding, it can be turned into a universal computer. The initial pattern can be thought of as the input. The rules produce an outcome that can be interpreted as a calculation. We can therefore draw a crude analogy between the model and the human brain, which also consists of spatially connected simple parts that rely on thresholdbased rules, albeit more complicated ones. That is not to say that the patterns we see in the Game of Life can explain consciousness. No book exists that is titled _The Game of Life: Consciousness Explained,_ though Daniel Dennett did write a book called _Consciousness Explained_ in which he posits that simple models like the Game of Life can provide insight into how consciousness might have evolved, an insight echoed by the physicist Stephen Hawking, who wrote, “It is possible to imagine that something like the Game of Life, with only a few basic laws, might produce highly complex features, perhaps even intelligence.”^10 

---

Figure 15.4: Patterns in the Game of Life 

---

### Summary 

In this chapter, we studied two models of interacting cells arranged on a grid. The first model, the local majority model, always goes to one of many possible equilibria, and we can interpret the model as analogous to a variety of physical and social processes. The second model, the Game of Life, can produce any class of outcome, from equilibria to randomness. That model claims no explicit connection to the real world. It provides an example of how constructing an alternative reality can produce insights—the emergence of dynamic macro-level structures from microlevel rules—that deepen our understanding of the world. As the Game of Life shows, the whole can perform functions that far exceed the capacities of its parts. If, for example, we create a slanted figure eight by connecting two 3-by3 boxes at their corners, the Game of Life produces a cyclic pattern of length eight. It cycles through a set of patterns and then returns to the figure eight in exactly eight steps. That a pattern resembling an eight acts “as if” it counts to eight is quite amazing. To understand how and why the Game of Life produces complexity while the local majority model inexorably moves to an equilibrium, we need additional analytic tools and frameworks. In Chapter 16 , we introduce Lyapunov functions, which use difference equations to classify the state of the world. By careful construction of a Lyapunov function, we can explain why the local majority model must head to equilibrium and also why the Game of Life need not. As a final note, the salience of the question of whether models, and by extension the real world, produce equilibria, patterns, complexity, or randomness arose naturally from our explorations with models. As we explored, we found some models go to equilibria and others do not. We think of using models to answer questions. In this chapter, we saw how models can raise questions as well. 

---