We can interpret the standard deviation in a time series of data as _volatility_. Investments in stocks, real estate, and privately held businesses all exhibit volatility. _Value at risk (VaR)_ measures the probability of a loss of a given amount during a specific time period. An investment with a one-year 5% VaR of $10,000 has a 5% probability of losing more than $10,000 at 

the end of one year.^10 Banks use VaR calculations to determine the amount of assets that must be kept on hand to avoid bankruptcy. For example, to secure an investment with a twoweek 40% VaR of $100,000, an investor may be asked to hold $100,000 in cash. If an investment follows a simple random walk with an increase or decrease of size _M_ each period, then it has an _N_ period 2.5% VaR of.^11 Thus, an investment that randomly goes up or down $1,000 each day has a nine-day 2.5% VaR of $6,000, and a one-year 2.5% VaR of $38,000. Notice that VaR increases linearly in the size of the steps but that it increases like the square root of the number of periods. We can use the formula for VAR to explain why the FDIC only requires that banks hold around 2% of their assets in cash overnight, but banks require that consumers put down 20% deposits on houses. The duration on the overnight loans is one day. Home loans can last for over a decade. The square root of three thousand and sixty-five days is approximately sixty. Here, we have assumed a normal random walk. Analysts calculating VaR often consider the past empirical distribution of returns. If the empirical distribution has a longer tail, that is, if it includes more large events, then VAR would increase as large events are more likely. Though VaR originated in finance, the idea can be applied broadly. A nonprofit that operates a volunteer-led Saturday 

---

morning soup kitchen that requires twenty-five volunteers might want to know the likelihood of lacking sufficient volunteers. If the number of volunteers follows a simple random walk that increases or decreases by 1 each week, then using the formula for VaR above, and setting _M_ = 1 and _N_ = 52, we find a oneyear 2.5% VaR of 15, implying the nonprofit has a 2.5% chance of a volunteer shortage. 

---